chapter one of the Yoga Sutras of
Patanjali this is a librivox recording
all librivox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by siddharth the Yoga Sutras
of Patanjali translated by Charles
Johnston introduction to book 1 the Yoga
Sutras of Patanjali are in themselves
exceedingly brief less than 10 pages of
last type in the original yet they
contain the essence of practical wisdom
set forth in admirable order and detail
the team is the present interpreter be
right is declared regeneration the birth
of the spiritual from the psychical man
the same team which fall so wisely and
eloquently set forth in writing to his
disciples in coordinate the team of all
mystics in all lands we think of
ourselves as living a purely physical
life in these material bodies of ours in
reality we have gone far indeed from
pure physical life for ages our life has
been psychical we have been centered and
immersed in the psychic nature some of
the schools of India say that psychic
nature is as it were a looking glass
wherein are murdered the things seen by
the physical eyes and heard by the
physical years but this is a magic
mirror the images remain and take a
certain life of their own
thus within the psychic realm of our
life there grows up an imaged world
wherein we dwell a world of images of
things seen and heard and therefore a
world of memories the world also of
hopes and desires of fears and regrets
mental life grows up among these images
built on a measuring and comparing on
the massing of images together into
general ideas on the abstraction of
new notions and images from these till a
new world is built after them full of
desires and hate ambition and me longing
speculation curiosity self-will
self-interest the teaching of the East
is that all these are true paths
overlaid by false desires not though in
manifestation psychical they are in
essence spiritual that the psychical man
is the wheel and prophecy of the
spiritual man the purpose of life
therefore is the realizing of that
prophecy the unmeaning of the immortal
man the birth of the spiritual from the
psychical whereby we enter our divine
inheritance and come to inhabit eternity
this is indeed salvation the purpose of
all true religion in all times Patanjali
has in mind the spiritual man to be born
from the psychical his purpose is to set
in order the practical means for the
unmeaning and degeneration and to
indicate the fruit the glory and the
power of that new birth through the
sutras of the first book but Anjali is
concerned with the first grade problem
the emergence of this spiritual man from
the wheels and meshes of the cyclic
nature the moods and Westers of the
mental and emotional man later will come
the concentration of the nature and path
of the spiritual man once he stands
clear of the psychic wheels and camels
and a view of the grounds in which these
new spiritual tasks are to be revealed
at this point may come a word of
explanation I have been asked why I used
the word sutras for these rules of
Patanjali system then the word Authority
has been connected with them in our
minds for a generation the reason is the
name aphorism suggests to me at least a
pity center
of very gentle application a piece of
probable wisdom that may be coated in a
good many set of circumstances and which
will almost be on its face the evidence
of its truth but with the sutra the case
is different it comes from the same root
as the word su and means indeed a thread
suggesting therefore a close knit consec
util chain of argument not only has a
sutra a different place in the system
but further taken out of this place it
will be almost meaningless and will by
no means be self-evident so I have
thought best to adhere to the original
word the Sutras of Patanjali are as
closely knit together as dependent on
each other as the prepositions of Euclid
and can no more be taken out of their
proper setting in the second part of the
first book the problem of the emergence
of the spiritual man is sort of dealt
with we are led to the consideration of
the barriers to his emergence of the
overcoming of the values and of certain
steps and stages any essent from the
ordinary consciousness of practical life
to the finer deeper radiant
consciousness of the spiritual man end
of introduction to book 1
chapter 2 of the Yoga Sutras of
Patanjali this is a librivox recording
all librivox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org read
for you by Chiquito Craster the Yoga
Sutras of Patanjali translated by
Charles Johnston chapter 2 book 1 1 ohm
here follows instruction in Union Union
here as always in the scriptures of
India means the union of the individual
soul with the Oversoul of the personal
consciousness with the divine
consciousness whereby the mortal becomes
immortal and enters the eater loop
therefore salvation is first freedom
from sin and the sorrow which comes from
sin and then a divine and eternal
well-being wherein the soul partakes of
the beam the wisdom and glory of God -
Union spiritual consciousness is gained
through control of the versatile psychic
nature the goal is the full
consciousness of the spiritual man
illumined by the divine light nothing
except the obdurate resistance of the
psychic nature keeps us back from the
goal the psychical powers are spiritual
powers / run wild perverted drawn from
their proper channel therefore our first
task is to regain control of this
perverted nature - chase'll purify and
restore the misplaced powers 3 when the
seer comes to consciousness in his
proper nature egotism is but the
perversion of spiritual being ambition
is the inversion of spiritual power
passion is the distortion of
the mortal is the limitation of the
immortal when the false images give
place to true when the spiritual man
stands for luminous as the Sun when the
clouds disperse for here to fool the
seer has been unmatched in the
activities of the psychic nature the
power and life which are the heritage of
the spiritual man have been caught and
enmeshed in psychical activities instead
of pure being in the divine there have
been fretful combative egotism its hand
against every man instead of the light
of pure vision there have been Restless
senses have been read and imaginings
instead of spiritual joy the undivided
joy of pure being
there has been self-indulgence of body
and mind these are all real forces but
distorted from their true nature and
goal they must be extricated like gems
from the matrix like the pit from the
Reeb steadily without destructive
violence spiritual powers are to be
drawn full from the psychic measures 5
the psychic activities are 5 they are
either subject or not subject to the
five hindrances book two three the
psychic nature is built up through the
image making power the power which lies
behind and dwells in mind pictures these
pictures do not remain quiet and in the
mind
they are kinetic Restless stimulating to
new acts thus the mind image of an
indulgence suggests and invites to a new
indulgence the picture of past joy is
framed in regrets or hopes and there is
a ceaseless way of the desire to know to
penetrate to the essence of things to
classify this to bizzy's itself
ceaselessly with the mind images so that
we may classify the activities of the
psyche
nature thus six these activities are
sound intellectual unsung intellectual
predication sleep memory we have here a
list of mental and emotional powers of
powers that picture and observe and a
powers that picture and feel but the
power to know and feel the spiritual and
immortal what is needed is not to
destroy it but to raise it from the
psychical to the spiritual realm seven
the elements of sound intellection are
direct observation inductive reason and
trustworthy testimony each of these is a
spiritual power sin lee veil direct
observation is the outermost form of the
souls pure vision inductive reason rests
on the great principles of continuity
and correspondence and these are the
supreme truth that all life is after the
one trustworthy testimony the sharing of
one soul in the wisdom of another rests
on the ultimate oneness of all souls
eight unsound intellectual is false
understanding not resting on a
perception of the true nature of things
when the object is not truly perceivable
when the observation is inaccurate and
faulty thought or reasoning based on
that mistaken perception is of necessity
false and unsound nine predication is
carried on through words or thoughts not
resting on an object precede the purpose
of this Sutra is to distinguish between
the mental process of predication and
observation induction or testimony
predication is the attribution of a
quality or action through a subject by
adding to it a predicate in the sentence
the man is wise the man is a subject is
wise is a predicate this may be simply
an interplay of thoughts without the
presence of the object sort of all the
things a thought
of maybe imaginary or unreal while
observation induction and testimony
always go back to an object ten sleep is
a psychic condition which rests on mind
states all material things being absent
in waking life we have two currents of
perception and outer current of physical
things seen and heard and proceeded and
in a current of mind images and thoughts
the outer current ceases in sleep the
inner current continues and watching the
mind images float before the field of
consciousness we dream even when there
are no dreams there is still a certain
consciousness and sleep so that on
waking one says I have slept well or I
have slept badly 11 memory is holding to
mind images of things perceived without
modifying them here as before the mental
power is explained in terms of mind
images which are the material of which
the psychic world is built
therefore the sages teach that the world
of our perception which is indeed a
world of Mind images is but the Wraiths
or shadow of the real and everlasting
world in this sense memory is but the
psychical inversion of the spiritual
ever-present
vision that which is ever before the
spiritual eye of the seer needs not to
be remembered 12 the control of these
the psychic activities comes through the
right use of the will and through
ceasing from self-indulgence if these
psychical powers and energies even such
evil things as passion and hate and fear
are but spiritual powers fallen and
perverted how are we to bring about
their release and restoration to means
are presented to us the awakening of the
spiritual will and the purification of
mind and thought 13 the right use of the
will is a steady effort to stand in
spiritual being we have thought of
ourselves
perhaps as creatures moving upon this
earth
rather helpless at the mercy of storm
and hunger and our enemies we are to
think of ourselves as immortals dwelling
in the light encompassed and sustained
by spiritual powers the steady effort to
hold his thought will awaken dormant and
I'll realize powers which will unveil to
us the nearness of the eternal 14 this
becomes a firm resting place when
followed long persistently with
earnestness we must seek a spiritual
life in conformity with the laws of
spiritual life with earnestness humility
gentle Jarett II which is an
acknowledgment of the one soul within us
all only through obedience to that
shared life through perceptual
remembrance of our oneness with all
divine being our nothingness a path of
divine being can be enter our
inheritance fifteen ceasing from
self-indulgence is conscious mastery
over the thirst for sensuous pleasure
here or hereafter rightly understood the
desire for sensation is the desire of
being the distortion of the soul's
eternal life the lust of sensual
stimulus and excitation rests on the
longing to feel one's life keenly to
gain the sense of being really alive
this sense of true life comes only with
the coming of the soul and the soul
comes only in silence after
self-indulgence has been courageously
and loyally still through reverence
before the coming soul sixteen the
consummation of this is freedom from
first for any mode of psychical activity
through the establishment of the
spiritual man in order to gain a true
understanding of this teaching study
must be supplemented by devoted practice
faith by works the reading of the words
will not avail they must be a real
effort to stand as a soul a real ceasing
from self-indulgence with this awakening
of the spiritual will and purification
we'll commit once the growth of the
spiritual men and our awakening
consciousness as the spiritual man and
this attained in even a small degree
will help us notably in our contest to
him that hat shall be given 17
meditation with an object follows these
stages first exterior examining then
interior judicial action then joy then
realization of individual being in the
practice of meditation a beginning may
be made by fixing the attention upon
some external object such as a sacred
image or picture or a part of a book of
devotion in the second stage one passes
from the outer object to an inner
pondering upon its lessons the third
stage is the inspiration the heightening
of the spiritual will which results from
this pondering the fourth stage is a
realization of one's spiritual beam as
in kindled by this meditation 18 after
the exercise of the will has still the
psychic activities meditation rests only
on the fruit of former meditations in
virtue of continued practice and effort
the need of an external object on which
to rest the meditation is outgrown an
interior state of spiritual
consciousness is reached which is called
the cloud of things Noble book for 29:19
subjective consciousness arising from a
natural cause is possessed by those who
have laid aside their bodies and been
absorbed into subjective nature those
who have died entered the paradise
between births are in a condition
resembling meditation without an
external object but in the fullness of
time the seeds of desire will them will
spring up and they will be born again
into this world 24 the others there is
spiritual consciousness led up to by
faith valor right mindfulness one
pointedness perception
it is well to keep in mind these steps
on the path to illumination faith valor
right mindfulness one pointedness
perception not one can be dispensed with
all must be one first faith and then
from faith valor from valor right
mindfulness from a right mindfulness a
one pointed aspiration toward the soul
from this perception and finally full
vision as the soul 21 spiritual
consciousness is nearest to those of
keen and hence will the image used in
the swift impetus of the torrent the
kingdom must be taken by force firm will
come only through effort effort is
inspired by faith the secret is this it
is not enough to have intuitions we must
act on them we must live them 22 the
will may be weak or of middle strength
or intense therefore there is a
spiritual consciousness higher than this
for those of weak will there is this
counsel to be faithful in obedience to
live the life and us to strengthen the
will to more perfect obedience the will
is not ours but God's and we come into
it only through obedience as we enter
into the Spirit of God we are permitted
to share the power of God higher than
the three stages of the way is the goal
of the end of the way 23 or spiritual
consciousness may be gained by ardent
service of the master if we think of our
lives as tasks laid on us by the master
of life if we look on all duties as
parts of that master's work entrusted to
us and forming our life work then if we
obey promptly loyally sincerely we shall
enter by degrees into the master's life
and share the Masters power thus we
shall be initiated into the spiritual
will twenty-four
master is a spiritual man who is free
from hindrances bondage to works and a
fruition and seed of works the soul of
the master the Lord is of the same
nature as the soul in us but we still
bear the burden of many evils we are in
bondage through our former works we are
under the dominance of sorrow the soul
of the master is free from sin and
servitude and sorrow twenty five in the
master is the perfect seed of
omniscience the soul of the master is in
essence the one with the over soul and
therefore partaker of the over souls all
wisdom and all power all spiritual
attainment rests on this and is possible
because the soul and the Oversoul are
1:26 he is the teacher of all who have
gone before since he is not limited by
time from the beginning the Oversoul has
been the teacher of all souls which by
the entrance into the Oversoul by
realizing their oneness with the
Oversoul have inherited the kingdom of
the light for the over soul is before
time and time father of all else is one
of his children 27 his word is home home
the symbol of the three-in-one the three
worlds in the soul the three times past
present future in eternity the three
divine powers creation preservation
transformation in the one being the
three essences immortality omniscience
joy in the one spirit this is the world
the symbol of the master and Lord the
perfected spiritual man 28 let there be
soundless repetition of ohm and
meditation there on this is many
meanings in ascending degrees there is
first the potency of the word itself
as all words then there is the manifold
significance of the symbol as suggested
above
lastly there is the spiritual
realization of the high essences that
symbolized thus we rise step-by-step to
the eternal
twenty-nine vents of the awakening
of interior consciousness and the
removal of barriers here again a faith
must be supplemented by which the life
must be led as well as study before the
full meaning can be understood the
awakening of spiritual consciousness can
only be understood in measure as it has
entered it can only be entered where the
conditions are present purity of heart
and strong aspiration and the resolute
conquest of each sin this however may
easily be understood that the
recognition of the three worlds is
resting in the soul leads us to realize
our shelves and all line as of the soul
that as we dwell not in past present or
future but in the eternal we become more
at one with the eternal that is review
all organization preservation mutation
as the work of the divine one we shall
come more into harmony with the one and
thus removed the barrier in our path
toward the light in the second part of
the first book the problem of the
emergence of the spiritual man is
further dealt with we are led to the
consideration of the barriers to his
emergence of the overcoming of the
barriers and of certain steps and stages
in the ascent from the ordinary
consciousness of practical life to the
final deeper radiant consciousness of
the spiritual man thirty the barriers to
interior consciousness which drive the
psychic nature this way and that are
these sickness inertia doubt light
mindedness laziness in temples false
notions inability to reach a stage of
meditation or to hold it when reached we
must remember the
we are considering the spiritual man as
unwrapped and enmeshed by the psychic
nature the emotional and mental powers
and as unable to come to clear
consciousness unable to stand and see
clearly because of the psychic wails of
the personality nine of these are
enumerated and they go pretty subtly
into the brute toughness of the psychic
nature
sickness is included rather for its
effect on the emotions and mind since
bodily infirmity such as blindness or
deafness is no insuperable barrier to
spiritual life and may sometime be a
help as cutting off distractions it will
be well for us to ponder over each of
these nine activities thinking of each
as a psychic state a barrier to the
interior consciousness of the spiritual
man thirty-one grieving despondency
bodily restlessness the drawing in and
sending forth of the life breath also
contribute to drive the psychic nature
to and fro the first two moods are
easily understood wiggle well see how a
sodden psychic condition flagrantly
opposed to the pure and positive joy of
spiritual life would be a barrier the
next bodily restlessness is in a special
way the fault of our day and generation
when it is conquer mental restlessness
will be half conquered to the next two
terms concerning the life breath offer
some difficulty the surface meaning is
harsh and irregular breathing the deeper
meaning is a life of harsh and irregular
impulses thirty-two steady application
to a principle is the way to put a stop
to these the will which in its pristine
state was full of rigor has been
steadily corrupted by self-indulgence
the seeking of moods and sensations for
sensations sake
hence come all the morbid and sickly
moods of the mind the remedy is a return
to the pristine
of the will by vigorous positive effort
or as we are here told by steady
application to a principle the principle
to which we should thus steadily apply
ourselves should be one arising from the
reality of spiritual life valorous work
for the soul in others as in ourselves
thirty-three by sympathy were the happy
compassion for the sorrowful delight in
the holy disregard of the unholy the
psychic nature moves to gracious peace
when we are wrapped up in ourselves
shrouded with a cloak of our egotism
absorbed in our pains and bitter
thoughts we are not willing to disturb
or strain our own sickly mood by giving
kindly sympathy to the happy thus
doubling their joy or by showing
compassion for the sad thus having their
sorrow we refuse to find delight in holy
things and let the mind brood and sad
pessimism on unholy things all these
evil psychic moods must be conquered by
strong effort of will this rending of
the whales will reveal to us something
of the Grace and peace which are of the
interior consciousness of the spiritual
man 34 or peace may be reached by the
eben sending forth and control of the
life breath here again we may look for a
double meaning first that even and quiet
breathing which is a part of the victory
of a bodily restlessness then the even
and quiet tenor of life without harsh or
dissonant impulses which brings a
stillness to the heart thirty-five
faithful persistent application to any
object if completely attained will bind
the mind to steadiness we are still
considering how to overcome the wavering
and perturbation of the psychic nature
which make it quite unfit to transmit as
the inward consciousness
and stillness we are once more told to
use the will and to train it by steady
and persistent work by sitting close to
our work in the phrase of the original
36 as also will a joyful a radiant
spirit there is no such illusion as
gloomy pessimism and it has been truly
said that a man's cheerfulness is a
measure of his faith due despondency the
pale cast of thought are very amenable
to the will study and courageous effort
will bring a clear and valorous mind but
it must always be remembered that it is
not the solace to the personal man but
is rather an offering to the ideal of
spiritual life a contribution to the
universal and universally shared
treasure in heaven 37 or the purging of
self-indulgence from the psychic nature
we must recognize that the fall of man
is a reality exemplified in our own
persons we have quite other sins away
the animals and pharmo dilatory us and
they have all come through
self-indulgence with which our psychic
natures are soaked through and through
as we climbed downhill for our pleasure
so we must climb up again for our
purification and restoration to our
former high estate the process is
painful perhaps yet indispensable
38 or a pondering on the perceptions
gained in dreams and dreamless sleep for
the Eastern sages dreams are it is true
made up of images of waking life
reflection of what the eyes have seen
early years heard but dreams are
something more for the images are in a
sense real objective on their own plane
and the knowledge that there is another
world even a dream world widens the
tyranny of material life much of the
poetry and art is such a solace
from dreamland but there is more in
dream for it make image what is above as
well as what is below not only the
children of men but also the children by
the shore of the immortal scene that
brought us hither may throw their images
on this magic mirror so two of the
secrets of dreamless sleep with its pure
vision an even greater degree 39 or
meditative brooding on what is dearest
to the heart here is a thought which our
own day is beginning to grasp that love
is a form of knowledge that we truly
know anything or any person by becoming
one very in love thus love has a wisdom
that the mind cannot claim and by this
haughty love this becoming one with what
is beyond our personal borders we may
take a long step to it freedom to
directions for this may be suggested the
pure love of the artist for his work and
the earnest compassionate search into
the hearts of others
forty thus he masters all from the atom
to the infinite Newton was asked how he
made his discoveries by intending my
mind on them we require this steady
pressure list becoming one with what we
seek to understand whether it be atom or
soul is the one means to know when we
become a thing we really know it not
otherwise therefore live the life to
know the doctrine do the will of the
Father
if you would know the father 41 when the
perturbations of the scientific nature
have all been still then the
consciousness like a pure crystal takes
the color of what it rests on whether
that be the perceiver perceiving or the
thing perceived this is a fuller
expression of the last suitor and is so
lucid that comment can hardly add to it
everything is either perceiver
perceiving or the thing perceive or as
we might
say consciousness force or matter the
sage tells us that the one key will
unlock the secrets of all three the
secrets of consciousness force and
matter alive the thought is that the
cordial sympathy of a gentle heart
intuitively understanding the hearts of
others is really a manifestation of the
same power as that penetrating
perception whereby one Divine's the
secrets of planetary motions or atomic
structure 42 when the consciousness
poised in perceiving blends together the
lane the object dwelt on and the idea
this is perception with exterior
consideration in the first stage of the
consideration of an external object the
perceiving mind comes to it preoccupied
by the name and idea conventionally
associated with that object for example
in coming to the study of a book we
think of the author his period the
school to which he belongs the second
stage set forth in the next Sutra those
directly to the spiritual meaning of the
book setting its traditional trappings
aside and finding its application to our
own experience and problems the
commentator takes a very simple
illustration a cow where one considers
in the first stage the name of the cow
the animal itself and the idea of a cow
in the mind in the second stage one
pushes these trappings aside and
entering into the inmost being of the
cow shares its consciousness as do some
of the artists who paint cows they get
at a very life of what they study and
paint 43 when the object dwells in the
mind clear of memory pictures and
colored by the mind as a pure luminous
idea this is perception without exterior
or consideration we are still considered
external visible objects such perception
as is here described is of the nature of
that penetrating
we're by Newton intending his mind and
things made his discoveries all that
away by a really great portrait painter
Pierce's to the soul him who he paints
and makes that soul live on canvas these
stages of perception are described in
this way to lead the mind up to an
understanding of the piercing soul
vision of the spiritual man
the immortal 44 the same two steps when
referring to things are finer substance
are said to be with or without judicial
action of the mind we now come to mental
or psychical objects to images in the
mind it is precisely by comparing
arranging superposing these mind images
that we get our general notions or
concepts this process of analysis and
synthesis whereby we select the certain
qualities in a group of mind images and
then range together those of like
quality is the judicial action of the
mind spoken off but when we exercise
Swift divination upon the mind images as
there's a poet or a man of genius then
we use a power higher than the judicial
and one nearer to the keen vision of the
spiritual men forty-five subtle
substance rises in ascending degrees to
that pure nature which has no
distinguishing mark as we ascend from
outer material things which are
permeated by separateness and whose
chief characteristic is to be separate
just as so many pebbles are separate
from each other as we ascend first to
mind images which overlap and coalesce
in both space and time and then to ideas
and principles we finally come to pure
essences drawing ever nearer and nearer
to unity or we may illustrate this
principle rush our bodily external
selves are quite distinct and separate
in form named place
our mental selves are finer substance
meet and part meet and part again in
perceptual concussion and interchange
our spiritual selves attain through
consciousness through unity where the
partition wall between us and the
highest between us and others is broken
down and we are all made perfect in the
one the highest riches are possessed by
all pure souls only when United thus we
arise from separation to the true
individuality in unity 36v above are the
degrees of limited and conditional
spiritual consciousness still containing
the seed of separateness in the four
stages of perception above describe the
spiritual vision is still working
through the mental and psychical the
inner genius is still expressed through
the outer personal man the spiritual man
has yet to come completely to
consciousness
as himself in his own realm the
psychical veils laid aside 47 when pure
perception without judicial action of
the mind is reached they follows the
gracious peace of the inner self
we have instanced certain types of this
pure perception the poet's divination
whereby he sees the spirit within the
symbol lightness and things unlike and
beauty in all things the pure inside of
the truth philosopher whose vision rests
not on the appearances of life but on
its realities or the Saints firm
perception of spiritual life and being
all these are far advanced on the way
they have drawn near to the secret
dwelling the peace 48 in that peace
perception is unfailingly true
the poet divides philosopher and the
saint not only reach a wide and luminous
consciousness but they gain certain
knowledge of substantial reality when we
know we know that we know for we have
come to the stage where we know things
by being
them and nothing can be more true than
being we rest on the rock and know it to
be rock rooted in the very heart of the
world 14 I'm the object of this
perception is other than what is learned
from the sacred books or by sound
inference since this perception this
particular the distinction is a luminous
and inspiring one the scriptures teach
general truths concerning Universal
spiritual life and broad laws and
inference from their teaching is not
less general but the spiritual
perception of the awakened seer brings
particular truth concerning his own
particular life than leads whether these
before himself or others he receives a
defined precise knowledge exactly
applying to what he has at heart 50 the
impress on the consciousness springing
from this perception supersedes all
previous impressions each state or field
of the mind each field of knowledge so
to speak which is reached by mental and
emotional energies is a psychical state
just as the mind picture of a stage with
the actors on it is a psychical state or
field when the pure vision as of the
poet the philosopher the saint fills the
whole field all lesser views and visions
are crowded out the high consciousness
displaces all lesser consciousness yet
in a certain sense that which is viewed
this part even by the vision of a sage
has still an element of illusion a film
psychical veil however pure and luminous
that whale may be it is the last and
highest psychic state 51 when this
impression ceases then since all
impressions have seized there arises
pure spiritual consciousness with no
seed of separateness left the last
psychic veil is drawn aside and the
spiritual man stands with unveiled
vision
pure serene Endel chapter to read for
you by Chiquito crustal Birmingham
Alabama the need chapter three of the
Yoga Sutras by Patanjali this is a
librivox recording all librivox
recordings are in the public domain for
more information or to volunteer please
visit librivox.org the Yoga Sutras of
Patanjali translated by Charles Johnston
chapter 3 introduction to book 2 the
first book of Patanjali Yoga Sutras is
called the book of spiritual
consciousness the second book which we
now begin is the book of the means of
soul growth and we must remember that
soul growth here means the growth of the
realization of the spiritual man or to
put the matter more briefly the growth
of the spiritual man and the
disentangling of the spiritual man from
the wrappings the veils the disguises
laid upon him by the mind and the
psychical nature
wherein he has emerged like a bird
caught in a net the question arises by
what means made a spiritual man be freed
from these psychical meshes and
disguises so that he may stand forth
above death in his radiant eternalness
and divine power and the second book
sets itself to answer this very question
and to detail the means in a way
entirely practical and very lucid so
that he who runs may read and he who
reads may understand and practice the
second part of the second book is
concerned with practical spiritual
training that is with the earlier
practical training of the spiritual man
the most striking thing in it is the
emphasis laid on the commandments which
are precisely those of the latter part
of the Decalogue together with obedience
to the master or day and generation
as far to prone to fancy that there can
be mystical life and growth on some
other foundation on the foundation for
example of intellectual curiosity or
psychical selfishness in reality on this
lighter foundation the life of the
spiritual men can never be built nor
indeed anything but a psychic
counterfeit a dangerous delusion
therefore Patanjali like every great
spiritual teacher meets the question
what must I do to be saved with the
age-old answer keep the commandments
only after the disciple can say these
have I kept can there be the further and
finer teaching of the spiritual rules
it is therefore vital for us to realize
that the yoga system like every true
system of spiritual teaching rests on
this broad and firm foundation of
honesty truth cleanness obedience
without these there is no salvation and
he who practices these even though
ignorant of spiritual things is laying
up treasure against the time to come end
of chapter three chapter four of the
Yoga Sutras of Patanjali this easily
blocks recording all librivox recordings
are in the public domain for more
information or to volunteer please visit
librivox.org recording by otis agar the
Yoga Sutras of Patanjali translated by
Charles Johnston book 2 from 1 to 28
book to 1 the practices which make for
union with the soul are fervent
aspiration spiritual reading and
complete obedience to the master the
word which I have rendered fervent
aspiration means primarily fire and in
the Eastern teaching it means the fire
which gives life and light at the same
time the fire which purifies we have
therefore as our first practice as the
first of the means of spiritual growth
that fire
quality of the will which and candles
and elements and at the same time the
study practice of purification the
burning away of all known impurities
spiritual reading is so universally
accepted and understood that it needs no
comment the very study of Patanjali
sutras is an exercise in spiritual
reading and a very effective one and so
with all of the books of the soul
obedience to the master means that we
shall make the will of the master our
will and shall confirm in all wave to
the will of the divine setting aside of
wills of self which are but psyche
distortions of one divine will the
constant effort to obey in all the ways
we know and understand will reveal new
ways and new tasks the evidence of new
growth of the soul nothing will do more
for the spiritual man in a Stander's
poor there is no such regenerating power
as the awakening spiritual will do their
aim is to bring soul vision and to wear
away hindrances the aim of fervor
spiritual reading and obedience to the
master is to bring soul vision and to
wear away hindrances or to use the
phrases we have already adopted the aim
of these practices is to help the
spiritual man to open his eyes to help
him also to throw aside the veils and
disguises the end meshing psychic nets
which surround him tying his hands as it
were and bandaging his eyes and this as
all teachers testify is a long and
arduous task a steady uphill fight
demanding fine courage and persistent
toil further the fire of the spiritual
will is as I said to fold it elements
and so helps the spiritual man to see
and it also burns up the nets and meshes
which ends near the spiritual man so
with the other means spiritual reading
and obedience each in its action is
twofold
wearing away the psychical and are
building the spiritual man three these
are the hindrances the darkness of
unwisdom self-assertion
last hate attachment let us try to
translate this into terms of the
psychical and spiritual man the darkness
of an wisdom is primarily the self
absorption of the psychical man is
complete preoccupation with his own
hopes and fears plans and purposes
sensations and desires so that he fails
to see or refuses to see that there is a
spiritual man and so doggedly resists
all efforts of the spiritual man to cast
off a psychic tyrant and set himself
free this is a real darkness and all
those who denied the immortality of the
soul or denied the souls existence and
so lay out their lives only for the
physical mortal man and his ambitions
are under this power of darkness born of
this darkness this psychic self
absorption is the dogged conviction that
the psychic personal man has separate
exclusive interests which he can follow
for himself alone and this conviction
when put into practice in our life leads
to contact with other personalities and
so to hate this hate again makes against
the spiritual man since it hinders the
revelation of the high harmony between
the spiritual man and his other selves a
harmony to be revealed only through the
practice of love that perfect love which
casts out fear
in like manner last is the psychic man's
craving for the stimulus of sensation
the din of which smothers the voice of
the spiritual man as in Shakespeare's
phrase the cackling geese would drown
the song of the nightingale and this
craving for stimulus is a fruit of
weakness
coming from the failure to find strength
in the primal life of the spiritual man
attachment is but another name for
psychic self absorption for we are
absorbed not an outward things but
rather in their images within our minds
our inner eyes are fixed on them are in
a desire brood over them and them we
blind ourselves to the presence of the
prisoner the enmeshed and fettered
spiritual man for the darkness of
unwisdom
is the field of the others these
hindrances may be dormant or
want in or suspended or expanded here we
have really two sutras in one the first
has been explained already in the
darkness of unwisdom
grows the parasites hazed last
attachment they're all outgrowth of the
self absorption of the psychical self
next we are told that these barriers may
be either dormant or suspended or
expanded or wanton Falls which are
dormant will be brought out through the
pressure of life or through the pressure
of krong aspiration
thus expanded they must be found and
conquered or as Patanjali kindly says
they must be wanting as a real mind or
the links of monocles 5 the darkness of
ignorance is holding that which is an
enduring impure full of pain not the
soul to be eternal pure full of joy the
soul this we have really considered
already the psychic man is an enduring
impure full of pain nor the soul nor the
real self the spiritual man is enduring
pure full of joy the real self the
darkness of unwisdom
is therefore the self absorption of the
psychical personal man to the exclusion
of the spiritual man it is the belief
carried into action that the personal
man is the real man the man for whom we
should toil for whom we should build for
whom we should live this is that cycle
man of whom it is said he that soweth to
the flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption 6 self-assertion comes from
thinking of the seer and the instrument
of vision as forming oneself this is a
fundamental idea of the Sankhya
philosophy of which the yoga is avowedly
the practical side to translate this
into our terms we may say that the
sphere is a spiritual man the instrument
of vision is the psychical man through
which the spiritual man gains experience
of the outer world but we turn the
servant into the master we attribute to
the cycle
man the personal self a reality which
really belongs to the spiritual man
alone and so thinking of the quality of
the spiritual man as belonging to the
cycle we merge the spiritual man in the
psychical or as the text says we think
of the two as forming oneself seven last
is the resting in the sense of enjoyment
this has been explained again and again
sensation as for example the sense of
taste is meant to be the guide to action
in this case the choice of wholesome
food and the avoidance of poisonous and
hurtful things but if we rest in the
sense of taste as the pleasure in itself
rest that is in the psychical side of
taste we fall into gluttony and live to
eat instead of eating to live so with
the other great organic power the power
of reproduction this lust comes into
being through resting in the sensation
and looking for pleasure from that a
hate is arresting in the sense of pain
pain comes for the most part from the
strife of personalities the jarring
discards between psychic selves each of
which deems itself supreme a dwelling on
this pain breeds hate which tears
devouring selves yet further asunder and
puts new and miri between them thus
hindering the harmony of the real the
reconciliation through the soul nine
attachment is the desire toward life
even in the wise carried forward by its
own energy the life here desired is the
psychic life the intensely vibrating
life of the psychic self this prevails
even in those who have attained much
wisdom so long as it fails Shore of the
wisdom of complete renunciation complete
obedience to each least behest of the
spiritual man and of the master who got
and aids the spiritual man the desire of
sensation the desire of psychic life
reproduces itself carried on by its own
energy and momentum and hence comes the
circle of death and rebirth instead of
the liberation of the spiritual
man 10 these hindrances when they have
become subtle are to be removed by a
counter-current the darkness of unwisdom
is to be removed by the light of wisdom
pursued through fervor spiritual reading
of holy teachings and of life itself
and by obedience to the master lust is
to be removed by pure aspiration of
spiritual life which bringing true
strength and stability takes away the
void of weakness which we try to fill by
the stimulus of sensations hate is to be
overcome by love the fear that arises
through the sense of separate varying
selves is to be stilled by the
realization of the one self the one soul
in all this realization is the perfect
love that casts out fear the hindrances
are said to have become subtle then by
initial efforts they have been located
and recognized in the psychic nature 11
their active turnings are to be removed
by meditation here is in truth the whole
secret of yoga the science of the soul
the active Turing's the student
vibrations of selfishness lust and hate
are to be stilled by meditation by
letting heart and mind dwell in
spiritual life by lifting up the heart
to the strong silent life above which
rests in the stillness of eternal love
and needs no harsh vibration to convince
it of true being 12 the burden of
bondage to sorrow has its root in these
hindrances it will be felt in this life
or in a life not yet manifested the
burden of bondage to sorrow has its root
in the darkness of and wisdom in
selfishness in lust in hate in
attachment to sensation all these are in
the last analysis absorption in the
psychical self and this means sorrow
because it means the sentence of
separateness and this means jarring
discord and inevitable death but the
psychical self will breed a new physical
self in a new birth and
so new sorrows in life not yet manifest
13 from this root they grow and ripen
the fruits of birth of the lifespan of
all that is tasted in life fully to
comment on this would be to write a
treatise on karma and it's practical
working in detail whereby the place and
time of the next birth its content and
duration are determined and to do this
the present commentator is nowise fitted
but this much is clearly understood that
through a kind of spiritual gravitation
the incarnated self is drawn to a home
and life cycle which will give it scope
and discipline and its need of
discipline is clearly conditioned by its
character its standing its
accomplishment 14 these bear fruits of
rejoicing or of affliction as they are
sprung from holy or unholy works since
holiness is obedient to divine law to
the law of divine harmony and obedience
to harmony strengthens that harmony in
the soul which is the one true joy
therefore joy comes of holiness comes
indeed in no other way and as an
holiness is disobedience and therefore
this God therefore unholiness makes for
pain and this twofold law is true
whether the cost takes effect in this or
in a yet and manifested birth 15 to him
who possesses discernment all personal
life is misery because it ever waxes and
wanes is ever afflicted with
restlessness makes ever new dynamic
impresses in the mind and because all
this activity is war with each other the
whole life of the psychic self is misery
because it ever waxes and wanes because
birth brings inevitable death because
there is no expectation without its
shadow fear the life of the psychic self
is misery because it is afflicted with
restlessness so that he who as much
finds no satisfaction but rather the
weighted hunger for more
the fire is not quenched by pouring oil
on it so desire is not quenched by the
satisfaction of desire again the life of
the psychic self is misery because it
makes ever new dynamic impresses in the
mind because a desire satisfied is by
the seed from which Springs the desire
to find like satisfaction again the
appetite comes in eating as a proverb
says and grows by what it feeds on and
the psychic self done with conflicting
desires is over the house divided
against itself which must surely falls
sixteen this pain is to be warded off
before it has come in other words we
cannot kill the pains of life by laying
on them any balm we must cut the root
absorption in the psychical self so it
is said there is no cure for the misery
of longing but to fix the heart upon the
eternal 17 the cost of what is to be
warded off is the absorption of the seal
in the things seen here again we have
the fundamental idea of the sound Kia
which is the intellectual counterpart of
the yoga system the cause of what is to
be warded off the root of misery is the
absorption of consciousness in the
psychical man and the things which
beguile the psychical man the cure is
liberation 18 think seen have as the
property manifestation action inertia
they form the basis of the elements and
the sense powers they make for
experience and for liberation here is
the whole philosophy of life think seen
the total of the phenomena possessed as
the property manifestation action
inertia the qualities of fools and
matter in combination these in the
grosser form make the material world in
their finer more subjective form they
make the psychical world the world of
sense impressions and mind images and
through this totality of the phenomenal
the soul gains experience and is
prepared for liberation in other words
the whole outer world exists for the
purposes of the soul and finds in this
it's true reason for being
nineteen
the grades or layers of the three
potencies are the defined the undefined
that with distinctive mark that without
distinctive mark or as you might say
there are two straight of the physical
and two straighter of the physical
realms in each there is a side of firm
and the side of force the form side of
the physical is here called the defined
the fore side of the physical is the
undefined that which has no boundaries
so in the physical there is the form
side that with distinctive marks such as
the characteristic features of mind
images and there is the full side
without distinctive marks such as forces
of desire or fear
which may flow now to this mind image
now to that xx the shear is pure vision
the pure he looks out through the
vesture of the mind the seal as always
is a spiritual man whose deepest
consciousness is pure vision the pure
life of the eternal but the spiritual
man as yet unseen in his proper person
looks out on the world through the eyes
of the psychical man by whom he is
unfolded and enmeshed the task is to set
this prisoner free to clear the dust of
Ages from this Barry Temple 21 the very
essence of things seen is that they
exist for this year the things of outer
life not only material things by the
psychic man also exist in very deed for
the purpose of the seer the soul the
spiritual man disaster comes when the
psychical man sets up so to speak on his
own account trying to live for himself
alone and taking material things
- so lays his loneliness 22 though
fallen away from him who has reached the
goal things seen have not also fallen
away since the still exist for others
when one of us conquers hate he does
know thereby sees out of the world since
others still hate and suffer hatred so
with other delusions which hold us in
bondage to material things and through
which we look at all material things
when the colored veil of illusion is
gone the world which we saw through it
is also gone for now we see life as it
is in the white radiance of it
but for others the colored veil remains
and therefore the world thus colored by
it remains for them and will remain till
they to conquer delusion 23 the
association of the seer who think scene
is the cause of the realizing of the
nature of things seen and also of the
realizing of the nature of the seer life
is educative our lives infinite variety
is for discipline for the development of
the soul cell passing through many lives
the soul learns the secrets of the world
the algaas laws that are written in the
form of snow crystal or the majestic
order of the stars yet all these laws
are but reflections but projections
outward of the laws of the soul
therefore in learning these so learns to
know itself our life is by the mirror
where in the soul learns to know its own
face 24 the cause of this association is
the darkness of unwisdom the darkness of
an wisdom is the absorption of
consciousness in the personal life and
in the things seen by the personal life
this is the fall through which comes
experience the learning of the lessons
of life when they are learned the day of
redemption is at hand
25 the bringing of this association to
an end by bringing the darkness of fun
with them to an end is the great
liberation this is a fierce attainment
of his own pure being when the spiritual
man has through the cycle learned all
life's lessons the time has come for him
to put off the veil and disguise of the
psychical and stand reveal the king in
the house of the Father so shall he
enter into his kingdom and go no more
out 26 a discerning which is carried on
without wavering is the means of
liberation here become closer to the
pure Vedanta with its discernment
between the eternal and the temporal st.
Paul after following Philo and Plato
lays down the same fundamental principle
the things seen are temporal the things
unseen are eternal
Patanjali means something more than an
intellectual assent though this too is
vital he has in view accounts
discriminating in act as well as thought
of the tules which present themselves
for every deed a choice always to choose
the highway dot which makes for the
things eternal honesty rather than
robbery courage and not cowardice the
things of another rather than one's own
sacrifice and not indulgence this true
discernment carried out constantly makes
for liberation 27 his illuminations is
Sevenfold rising in successive stages
but Angelus text does not tell us when
the seven stages of this illumination
are the commentator does describes them
first the danger to be escaped is
recognized it need not be recognized a
second time second the causes of the
danger to be escaped are worn away they
need not be worn away a second time
third the way of escape is clearly
perceived by the contemplation which
checks psychic perturbation for the
means of escape clear discernment has
been developed this is the fault full
release belonging to insight the final
release from the psychic is threefold
as fifth of the seven degrees the
dominance of its thinking is ended as
sixth its parenthese like rocks from a
precipice fall out themselves once
dissolved they do not grow again then a
seventh free from these potencies the
spiritual man stands forth in his own
nature as purity and light happy is a
spiritual man who beholds this Sevenfold
illumination and its ascending stages 28
from steadfastly following after the
means of yoga until impurity is one away
there comes the illumination of thought
up to full discernment here we enter on
the more detailed practical teaching of
Patanjali with its sound and luminous
could sense and when we come to detail
the means of yoga he may well be
astonished either simplicity there is
little in them that is mysterious they
are very familiar the essence of the
matter lies in carrying them out end of
book 2 from 1 to 28 recording by
Sagar chapter 5 of the Yoga Sutras of
Patanjali this easily blue ox recording
all librivox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Uday Sagar the Yoga Sutras
of Patanjali translated by Charles
Johnston book 2 from 29th to the end 29
the 8 means of yoga are the commandments
the rules right boys right control of
the life force withdrawal attention
meditation contemplation these eight
means are to be followed in the order in
the sense which will immediately be made
clear we can get a ready understanding
of the first two by comparing them with
the commandments which must be a weighed
by all good citizens and the rules which
are laid on the members of religious
orders until one has fulfilled the first
it is futile to concern oneself with a
second and so with all the means of yoga
they must be taken in the rather thirty
the commandments are these non-injury
truthfulness abstaining from stealing
from impurity from covetousness these
five precepts are almost exactly the
same as a Buddhist Commandments not to
kill not to steal not to be guilty of
incontinence not to drink intoxicants to
speak the truth almost identical ease
and pass list thou shalt not commit
adultery thou shalt not kill thou shalt
not steal thou shalt not cover and in
the same spirit is the answer made to
the young map having great positions who
has what shall I do to be saved and
received the reply keep the commandments
this broad general training which forms
and develops human character must be
accomplished at a very considerable
degree before there can be much hope of
success in the further stages of
spiritual life first the psychical and
then the spiritual first the man then
the angel on this broad you main advice
Foundation does the system of Patanjali
rest 31 the commandments not limited to
any race plays timer occasion Universal
are the great obligation the
commandments form the broad general
training of humanity
each one of them rests on a universal
spiritual law each one of them expresses
an attribute or aspect of the self the
eternal when we violate one of the
commandments we set ourselves against
the law and being of the eternal thereby
bringing ourselves to inevitable
confusion so the first steps in
spiritual life must be taken by bringing
ghazals into voluntary obedience to
these spiritual laws and thus making us
as partakers of the spiritual powers the
being of the eternal like the law of
gravity the need of air to breathe these
great laws no no exceptions they are
enforced in all lands throughout all
times for all mankind thirty-two the
rules are these purity serenity fervent
aspiration spiritual reading and perfect
obedience to the master here we have a
final law one which humanity as a whole
is less ready for less fit to obey yet
we can see that these rules are in the
same in a sense as the commandments but
on how a more spiritual plane the
commandments may be obeyed in outer acts
and abstinence --is the rules demand
obedience of the heart and spirit a far
more awakened and more positive
consciousness the rules are the
spiritual counterpart of the
commandments and they have finer degrees
for more advanced spiritual growth 33
when transgressions hinder the weight of
the imagination should be thrown on the
opposite side let us take a simple case
doubt of the thief's habitual criminal
who has drifted into stealing in
childhood before the moral consciousness
has awakened we may imprison such a
thief and deprive him of all possibility
of further theft or of fusing the divine
gift of will or we may recognize his
disadvantages and help him gradually to
build up possessions which express his
will
draw forth his self-respect if we
imagine that after he has built well and
his possessions have become dear to him
he himself is robbed then we can see how
he would come vividly to realize the
essence of theft and of honesty and
would leave to are his dealings with
firm conviction in some such way does
the Greek law teaches our sorrows and
losses teach us the pain of the sorrow
and loss we inflict on others
and so we cease to inflict them now as
to the more direct application to
conquer a sin let heart and my interest
not on the sin but on the contrary what
you let the sin be forced out by
positive growth in the true direction
not by direction opposition turn away
from the sin and go forward courageously
constructively creatively in well-doing
in this way the whole nature will
gradually be drawn up to the higher
level on which the sin does not even
exist
the conquest of a sin is a matter of
growth and evolution rather than of
opposition 34 transgressions are injury
falsehood theft incontinence Envy with a
committed or cost or assented to through
greed wrath or infatuation with a faint
or middling or excessive bearing endless
fruit of ignorance and pain therefore
must await be cast on the other side
here are the causes of sin greed wrath
infatuation with their effects ignorance
and pain the causes are to be cured by
better wisdom by truer understanding of
the self of life for greed cannot endure
before the realisation that the whole
world belongs to the self which self
fear nor can we hold wrath against one
who is one in the self and therefore
with ourselves nor can infatuation which
is the seeking for the happiness of the
all in some limited power of it survive
the knowledge that we are the heirs of
the all therefore let thought and
imagination mind and heart throw their
weight on the other side the side nor
the world bar of the self
35 where non-injury is perfected all
enmity ceases in the presence of him who
possesses it we come now to the
spiritual powers which result from
keeping the commandments from the
obedience to spiritual law which is the
keeping the commandments where the heart
is full of kindness which seeks no
injury to another either in act or
thought or wish this full love creates
an atmosphere of harmony whose benign
power touches with healing all who come
within its influence peace in the heart
radiates peace to other hearts even more
surely than contention breeds contention
36 when he is perfected in truth all
acts and the fruits depend on him the
commentator thus explains if he who has
attained should say to a man become
righteous the man becomes righteous if
he should say gain heaven the man gains
heaven his word is not in vain exactly
the same doctrine was taught by the
master who said to his disciples receive
ye the Holy Ghost who so ever since ye
remit they are remitted unto them and
whosoever since ye retain they are
retained 37 Vail cessation from TAF is
perfected all treasures present
themselves to him who possesses it here
is a sentence which may vaana's dar
beside the outer and operand meaning
there isn't many of these sentences a
second and final significance the
obvious meaning is that he who has
wholly seized from theft in act thought
and wish find buried treasures in his
path treasures of Gerald's and gold and
pearls the deeper truth is that he who
in every listing is only honest with the
spirit of life finds life supporting him
in all the things and games admittance
to the treasure house of life the
spiritual universe 38 for him who is
perfect in continents the revoir is
valor and virility the creative power
strong and full of vigor is no longer
dissipated but turned to spiritual uses
it upholds and endowed the spiritual man
conferring on him the creative will the
power to end general spiritual children
instead of bodily progeny an epoch of
life that of man the animal has come to
an end a new epoch that of the spiritual
man is opened the old creative power is
superseded and transcended a new
creative power that of the spiritual man
takes its place carrying with it the
power to work creatively in others for
righteousness and eternal life one of
the commentary says that he who has
attained is able to transfer to the
minds of the disciples what he knows
concerning divine union and the means of
gaining it this is one of the powers of
purity 39 where there is firm conquest
of covetousness he who has conquered it
awakes to the how and why of life so it
is said that before we can understand
the laws of karma we must free ourselves
from karma the conquest of covetousness
brings this rich fruit because the root
of covetousness is a desire of the
individual soul the will toward
manifested life and where the desire of
the individual soul is overcome by the
superb still life of the individual soul
welling up in the heart with the great
secret is discerned the secret that the
individual soul is not an isolated
reality by the Ray the manifest
instrument of the life which turns it
this way and that until the great work
is accomplished the age long lesson
learned thus is the how and why of life
disclosed by choosing from covetousness
the commentator says that this includes
knowledge of one's former Birds 40
through purity a withdrawal from one's
own bodily life a ceasing from
infatuation with the bodily life of
others as the spiritual light grows in
the hard withan as a taste for pure life
grows stronger the consciousness opens
towards the great secret places within
where all life is one where all lives
are one they're after
this outer manifested fugitive life
whether of ourselves or others loses
something of its charm and glamour
and we seek rather the deep infinitude
instead of the outer forearm and
surroundings of our lives we long for
their inner and everlasting essence we
desire not so much outer converse and
closing us to our friends but rather
that quiet communion with them in the
inner chamber of the soul their spirit
speaks the spirit the spirit answers
where alienation and separation never
enter where sickness and sorrow and
death cannot come 41 - the pure of heart
come also a quiet spirit one pointed
thought the victory over sensuality and
fitness to behold the soul blessed are
the pure in heart for they shall see God
who is a supreme soul the ultimate self
of all beings in the deepest sense
purity means fitness for this vision and
also a heart cleansed from all disquiet
from all wandering and unbridled thought
from the torment of sensuous Imaging's
and when the spirit is thus cleansed and
pure it becomes at one in essence with
its source the Great Spirit the primal
life one consciousness now trills
through both for the psychic partition
wall is broken down then shall the pure
heart see God because they become God 42
from acceptance the recital gains
happiness supreme one of the wise has
said accept conditions accept others
accept yourself this is the true
acceptance for all these things are what
they are through the will of the higher
self except the deficiencies which come
through twatting the will of the higher
self and can be conquered only through
compliance with our will by the true
acceptance the recital comes into
oneness of spirit with the overruling
soul and since the own nature of the
soul is being happiness bliss he comes
thereby into happiness supreme 43 the
perfection of the powers of the bodily
Westers comes through the wearing away
of impurities and through fervent
aspiration this is true of the physical
powers and of those which dwell in the
high of Escher's
there must be first purity as the blood
must be pure before one can attain to
physical health but absence of impurity
is not in itself enough else would many
nerveless ascetics of The Cloisters
ranked as high Saints there is needed
further a positive fire of the will a
key in vital vigor for the physical
powers and something final pure stronger
bond of kindred essence for the higher
powers the fire of genius is something
more than a phrase for there can be no
genius without the celestial file of the
awakened spiritual will 44 through
spiritual reading the disciple gains
communion with the divine power on which
his heart is said spiritual reading
meant for ancient India something more
than it does with us it meant first the
recital of sacred texts which in their
very sounds had mystical potencies and
it meant a recital of texts which were
divinely emanated and held him
themselves the living potent essence of
the divine for us spiritual reading
means a communing with the recorded
teachings of the Masters of wisdom way
by we read özil into the Masters mind
just as through his music one can enter
into the mind and soul of the master
musician it has been well said that all
true art is contagion of feeling so that
through the true meaning of true books
we do indeed read adults into the spirit
of the Masters share in the atmosphere
of their wisdom and power and come at
last into the very presence 45 soul
vision is perfected through perfect
obedience to the master the sorrow and
darkness of life come of the erring
personal will which sets itself against
the will of the soul the one great life
the error of the personal will is in
available since each will must be free
to choose to try and fail and so to find
the path and sorrow and darkness are
inevitable until the path be found and
the personal will made one small one
with the greater will wherein it finds
rest and power without losing freedom in
his will is our peace and with that
peace comes light soul vision is
affected through obedience 46 right boys
must be form and without strain here we
approach a section of the teaching which
has manifestly a two-fold meaning the
first is physical and concerns the
bodily position of the student and the
regulation of breathing these things
have the direct influence upon so life
the life of the spiritual man since it
is always and everywhere true in that
our study demands a sound mind in a
sound body
the present sentence declares that for
work and for meditation the position of
the body must be steady and without
strain in order that the final currents
of life may run their course it applies
further to the poise of the soul that
fine balance and stability which nothing
can shake where the consciousness rests
on the firm foundation of spiritual
being this is indeed the house set upon
a rock which the winds and waves beat
upon in vain 47 right poise is to be
gained by study and temperate effort and
by studying the heart upon the
everlasting here again there is the
twofold meaning for physical poise is to
be gained by study effort of the muscles
by gradual and vice training linked with
the right understanding of and relation
with the universal force of gravitiy
uprightness of body demands that both of
these conditions shall be fulfilled in
like manner
the form and upright poise of the
spiritual man is to be gained by study
and continued effort always guided by
wisdom and by setting the heart on the
eternal filling the soul with the
atmosphere of the spiritual world
neither is effective without the other
aspiration without efforts brings
witness effort without aspiration brings
a false strength not resting on enduring
things the two together make for the
right poise which sets the spiritual man
firmly and steadfastly on his feet 48
the fruit of right poise is a strength
to resist the shocks of infatuation or
sorrow in the simpler physical sense
which is also coveted by the worrying of
the original this entrance means the
wise afford establishes
bodily boys that the accidents of life
cannot disturb it as the captain remains
study though disaster overtake his ship
but the deeper sense is far more
important the spiritual man to must
learn to withstand all shocks to remain
steadfast to the perturbations of
external things and storms and whirl
winds of the psychical world this is the
power which is gained by wise continuous
effort and by filling the spirit with
the atmosphere of the eternal 49 when
this is gained there follows the right
guidance of the life currents the
control of the incoming and outgoing
breath it is well understood today that
most of all maladies come from impure
conditions of the blood it is coming to
be understood that right breathing right
oxygenation will do very much to keep
the blood clean and pure therefore a
right knowledge of breathing is a part
of the signs of life but the deeper
meaning is that spiritual man when he
has gained poise to right foot and
aspiration can stand firm and guide the
currents of his life both the incoming
current of events and the outgoing
current of his adds exactly the same
symbolism is used in the saying not that
which goeth into the mouth the filter
man but that which cometh out of the
mouth this befell it a man those things
which proceed out of the mouth come
forth from the heart out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts murders
uncleanness thefts false witness
blasphemies therefore the first step in
purification is to keep the commandments
50 the life current is either outward or
inward or balanced it is regulated
according to place time number it is
prolonged and subtle the technical
physical side of this has its value in
the breath there should be right in
reading followed by the period of pause
when the air comes into contact with the
blood and this again followed by right
out breathing even steady silent further
the lungs should be evenly filled many
maladies may arise from the neglect and
consequent weakening of some region of
the lungs and
number of breaths is so important so
closely related to health that every
nurse chart records it but the deeper
meaning is concerned with the current of
life with that which couette endo and
cometh out of the heart 51 the fourth
degree transcends external and internal
objects the inner meaning seems to be
that in addition to the three degrees of
control already described control that
is over the incoming current of life
over the outgoing current and over the
condition of pause or quiescence there
is a fourth degree of control which
holds in complete mastery both the outer
passage of events and the in occurrence
of thoughts and emotions a condition of
perfect poise and stability in the midst
of the flux of things outward and inward
fifty-two day Bar is worn away the veil
which covers up the light the veil is
the psychic nature the web of emotions
desires argumentative trains of thought
which cover up and obscure the truth by
absorbing the entire attention and
keeping the consciousness in the psychic
realm when hopes and fears are reckoned
at the true world in comparison with
lasting positions of the soul when the
outer reflections of things have ceased
to distract us from inner realities when
argumentative thought no longer in
tangles us but yields its place to
flashing intuition the serenity which
brings from within then is the well worn
away the consciousness is drawn from the
psychical to the spiritual from the
temporal to the eternal then is the
light unveiled 53 thence comes the minds
power to hold itself in the light it has
been well said that what we most need is
a Faculty of spiritual attention and in
the same direction of thought it has
been eloquently declared the prayer does
not consider in our catching God's
attention but rather in our allowing God
to hold their attention the vital matter
is that we need to disentangle our
consciousness from the noisy and
perturbed child 'm of the psychical and
come to consciousness as a spiritual man
this we must do for
first by purification through the
commandments and the rules and second
through the Faculty of spiritual
attention by steadily heating and less
fine intimations of the spiritual power
within us and by intending our
consciousness dead too thus by decreased
transferring the center of consciousness
from the psychical to the spiritual it
is a question first of Lao and then of
attention 50 for the right withdrawal is
the disengaging of the powers from
entanglement in all the things as the
psychic nature has been withdrawn and
stilled
to understand this let us reverse the
process and think of the one
consciousness centered in the soul
gradually expanding and taking on the
form of the different perceptive powers
the one will at the same time
differentiating itself into the varied
powers of action now let us imagine this
to be reversed so that the spiritual
force which has gone into the
differentiated powers is once more
gathered together into the inner power
of intuition and spiritual will taking
on that unity which is the hallmark of
spiritual things as diversity is a seal
of material things it's all a matter of
flower for the quality of spiritual
consciousness as against psychical
consciousness of love and attention for
where the heart is there will the
treasure be also where the consciousness
is there will the master with its powers
be developed 55 there upon follows
perfect mastery over the powers when the
spiritual condition which we have
described is reached with its purity
poised and illuminated vision the
spiritual man is coming into his
inheritance and gaining complete mastery
of his powers indeed much of the
struggle to keep the commandments and
the rules has been paving the way for
this mastery through this very struggle
and sacrifice the mastery has become
possible just us to use then Paul simile
the athlete gains a mastery in the
contest and the race through the
sacrifice of his long and arduous
training
thus he gains the crown end of book 2
from 29th to the end recording by Adi
Sagar
introduction to be free of the Yoga
Sutras of Patanjali this is a librivox
recording all librivox recordings are in
the public domain for more information
or to volunteer please visit
librivox.org recording by for Gonzalez
the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali translated
by Charles strand Stern introduction to
book free the third book of Sutra sister
book of spiritual powers in considering
these special powers to things as he
understood and kept in memory the first
thesis this these spiritual powers can
only be gained the development described
in the first and second books has been
measurably attained now the commandments
have been kept the rules faithfully
followed and experiences which are
described have been passed through for
only after the slippery troll man so far
grown so far this entangled from the
psychical bandages and veil to jab
confining blinded him that he can use
his proper powers and faculties for this
is the secret of all spiritual powers
they are in no sense an abnormal as for
natural overgrowth upon the material man
burrow rather the powers in faculties
inherent in the spiritual man entirely
natural to him and coming naturally into
activity as a spiritual man as is
entangled and liberated from the
psychical bondage for keeping the
commandments and rules already set forth
a step as no man has the limitation and
inversion of the spiritual man all his
faculties and powers are inversions of
the power was a spiritual man in a
single phrase his self seeking is an
inversion of the self seeking which is
their very being the spiritual man the
ceaseless search shutter divine and
August self of all beings this inversion
is corrected by keeping the commandments
and rules and gradually as the inversion
is overcome the spiritual man is
extricated on comes into possession and
free exercise of his powers the
spiritual power strive for are the
powers of the grown and liberated
Brett Shore ma'am the Ginola be develop
and use a spiritual man gross Senate
Saints liberation for obedience this is
the first thing to be kept in mind in
all that is said a spiritual powers in
the third and fourth books of sutras
the second thing to be understood and
kept in mind is this justice our more
than sages have discerned and told at
all masses ultimately one in eternal
definitely related throughout the whole
wide universe vs t of discern and
thought at all falls this one in eternal
so coordinated throughout the whole
universe that whatever affects any atom
measurably affects the whole boundless
realm of matter and force to the most
recent star on a Beulah on the dim
confines of space so the ancient sages
had discerned and saw that all
consciousness as one immortal
indivisible infinite so finally
correlated and continuously whatever is
perceived by any consciousness is
whether actually or potentially within
the reach of all consciousness and
therefore within the reach of any
consciousness this has been well
expressed by saying that all souls are
fundamentally one with her over so that
the Son of God and all sons of God are
fundamentally one with a father but the
consciousness is cleared of psychic
bonds and veils when the spiritual man
is able to stand to see then disapper
law comes into effect what service
within the knowledge of any
consciousness and this includes the
whole infinite universe is within his
reach and may if he rules be made a part
of his consciousness this he may attain
for his fundamental unity with the
Oversoul raising his out to all the
consciousness above him and drawing on
its resources the son if he would work
miracles
whether perception or a faction muscum
often into the presence of the father
minister bar either the spiritual man
Prewitt he comes into possession of his
splendid and immortal powers let it be
clearly kept in mind that orders harris
to be relayed to of the spiritual man
and his exalted powers must in no wise
be detached from what has been
gone before the being the very inception
of the spiritual man depends in a proof
occasion and moral attainment already
detailed and can in no wise dispense
with ISA could say with them but no one
imagined at the true life the true
powers of the spiritual man can be
attained by any way except a hard way of
sacrifice of trial of renunciation of
selfless of conquests and genuine
devotion to the will of all others only
thus can the golden Gate's the reach and
enter only thus can we attain pure world
barren the spiritual man lives and moves
and has his being nothing impure nothing
unholy can ever crossed at fresh hole
these are all impure motives also
seeking desires these must be burnt away
before an entrance to that wall can be
gained but were they slight there is
shadow and too lofty light of the soul
pass upon the clouds of the mid world of
the shadow of the spiritual man and
office powers the bastard vesture and
bastard powers of psychism are easily
attained yet even when attained they are
a delusion the very essence of unreality
therefore ponder all the earlier rules
and lay a firm foundation of courage
sacrifice selflessness holiness and of
introduction typic free recording by
April Gonzalez and Kavita Philippines
book 3 of the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali
this is a librivox recording all
librivox recordings are in the public
domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org
recording by Kurt Ziegler the Yoga
Sutras of Patanjali translated by
Charles Johnson book 3 1 through 28 1
The Binding of the perceiving
consciousness to a certain region his
attention dhaarana emerson quotes our
Isaac Newton as saying that he made his
great
breeze by intending his mind on them
that is what is meant here I read the
page of a book while thinking of
something else at the end of the page I
have no idea what it is about and read
it again
still thinking of something else with
the same result when I wake up so to
speak make an effort of attention fix my
thought on what I am reading and easily
taken its meaning the act of will the
effort of attention the intending of the
mind on each word and line of the page
just as the eyes are focused on each
word in line is the power here
contemplated it is the power to focus
the consciousness on a given spot and
hold it their attention is the first and
indispensable step in all knowledge
attention to spiritual things is the
first step to spiritual knowledge to a
prolonged holding of the perceiving
consciousness in that region is
meditation
Tianna this will apply equally to outer
and inner things I may for a moment fix
my attention on some visible object a
single penetrating glance or I may hold
the attention fixedly on it until it
reveals far more of its nature then a
single glance could perceive the first
is the focusing of the searchlight of
consciousness upon the object the other
is the holding of the white beam of
light steadily and persistently on the
object until it yields up the secret of
its details so for things within one may
fix the inner glance for a moment on
spiritual things or one may hold the
consciousness steadily upon them and
tell what was in the dark slowly comes
forth into the light and yields up its
immortal secret but this is possible
only for the spiritual man after the
commandments and the rules have been
kept for until this is done
the thronging storms of psychical
thoughts dissipate and distract the
attention so that it will not remain
fixed on spiritual things the cares of
this world the deceitfulness of riches
choke the word of the spiritual message
3 when perceiving consciousness in this
meditate is wholly given to a loom
the essential meaning of the object
contemplated and is freed from the sense
of separateness and personality
this is contemplation Samadhi let us
review the steps so far taken first the
beam of perceiving consciousness is
focused on a certain region or subject
through the effort of attention then
this attending consciousness is held on
its object
third is the ardent will to know its
meaning to illuminate with comprehending
thought fourth all personal bias all
desire merely to endorse a previous
opinion and so to prove one's self right
and all desire for personal profit or
gratification must be quite put away
there must be a purely disinterested
love of truth for its own sake this is
the perceiving consciousness made void
as it were of all personality or sense
of separateness the personal limitation
stands aside and lets the all
consciousness come to bear upon the
problem the Oversoul bends its ray upon
the object and illumines it with pure
light for when these three attention
meditation contemplation are exercised
at once this is perfectly concentrated
meditation samyama when the personal
limitation of the perceiving
consciousness stands aside and allows
the all conscious to come to bear upon
the problem then arises that real
knowledge which is called a flash of
genius that real knowledge which makes
discoveries and without which no
discovery can be made however
painstaking the effort for genius is the
vision of the spiritual man and that
vision is a question of growth rather
than prison effort though right effort
right Lee continued will in time
infallibly lead to growth and vision
through the power thus to set aside
personal limitation to push aside petty
concerns and cares and study the whole
nature and will in an ardent love of
truth and desire to know it through the
power thus to make way for the all
consciousness all great men make their
discoveries Newton watching the Apple
fall to the earth was able to look
beyond to see the subtle waves of force
pulsating through apple's worlds and
suns and galaxies and thus to perceive
universal gravitation the Oversoul
looking through his eyes recognized the
universal force one of its own children
Darwin watching the forms and motions of
plants and animals let the same a gust
consciousness come to bear on them and
saw infinite growth perfected through
ceaseless struggle he perceived the
superb process of evolution the Oversoul
once more recognizing its own Fraunhofer
noting the dark lines in the band of
sunlight in a spectroscope defined their
identity with the bright lines in the
spectra of incandescent iron sodium and
the rest and so saw the oneness of
substance in the worlds and Suns the
unity of the materials of the universe
once again the Oversoul looking with his
eyes recognized its own so it is with
all true knowledge but the mind must
transcend its limitations its
idiosyncrasies there must be purity for
to the pure in heart is the promise that
they shall see God
v by mastering this perfectly
concentrated meditation there comes the
illumination of perception the meaning
of this is illustrated by what has been
said before when the spiritual man is
able to throw aside the trammels of
emotional and mental limitation and to
open his eyes he sees clearly he attains
to illuminated perception a poet once
said that occultism
is the conscious cultivation of genius
and it is certain that the waken
spiritual man attains to the perceptions
of genius genius is the vision the power
of the spiritual man whether its
possessor recognizes this or not all
true knowledge is of the spiritual man
the greatest in all ages have recognized
this and put their testimony on record
the great in wisdom who have not
consciously recognized it have ever been
full of the spirit of reverence of
selfless devotion to truth
of humility as was Darwin and reference
and humility are the unconscious
recognition of the nearness of the
spirit that divinity which broods over
us a master or slave six this power is
distributed in ascending degrees it is
to be attained step-by-step it is a
question not of miracle but of evolution
of growth Newton had to master the
multiplication table then the four rules
of arithmetic then the rudiments of
algebra before he came to the binomial
theorem at each point there was
attention concentration in sight until
these were attained no progress to the
next point was possible so with Darwin
he had to learn the form and use of leaf
and flower of bone and muscle the
characteristics of genera and species
the distribution of plants and animals
before he had in mind that Nexus of
knowledge on which the light of his
great idea was at last able to shine so
it is with all knowledge so it is with
spiritual knowledge take the matter this
way the first subject for the exercise
of my spiritual insight is my day with
its circumstances its hindrances its
opportunities its duties I do what I can
to solve it to fulfill its duties to
learn its lessons I try to live my day
with aspiration and faith that is the
first step by doing this I gather a
harvest for the evening I gain a deeper
insight into life in virtue of which I
begin the next day with a certain
advantage a certain spiritual advance
and attainment
so with all successive days in faith and
aspiration we pass from day to day in
growing knowledge and power with never
more than one day to solve at a time
until all life becomes radiant and
transparent 7 this threefold power of
attention meditation contemplation is
more interior than the means of growth
previously described very naturally so
the
as the means of growth previously
described were concerned with the
extrication of the spiritual man from
psychic bondage and veils while this
threefold power is to be exercised by
the spiritual man must extricated and
standing on his feet viewing life with
open eyes eight but this triad is still
exterior to the soul vision which is
unconditioned free from the seed of
mental analysis the reason is this the
threefold power we have been considering
the triad of attention contemplation
meditation is so far as we have yet
considered it the focusing of the beam
of perceiving consciousness upon some
form of manifesting being with the view
of understanding it completely there is
a higher stage where the beam of
consciousness is turned back upon itself
and the individual consciousness enters
into and knows the Hall consciousness
this is a beam of being in immortality
rather than knowing it is free from
mental analysis or mental forms it is
not an activity of the higher mind even
the mind of the spiritual man it is an
activity of the soul had Newton risen to
this higher stage he would have known
not the laws of motion but that of high
beam from whose life comes eternal
motion had Darwin risen to this he would
have seen the soul who's graduated
thought and being all evolution
expresses there are therefore these two
perceptions that of living things and
that of the life that of the souls works
and that of the soul itself
9:1 of the ascending degrees is the
development of control first there is
the overcoming of mind impress of
excitation then comes the manifestation
of the mind press of control then the
perceiving consciousness follows after
the moment of control this is the
development of control the meaning seems
to be this some object enters the field
of observation and at first violently
excites the mind stirring up curiosity
wonder then the consciousness returns
upon itself as it were and takes the
perception firmly in hand steady in
itself and viewing the matter calmly
from above this steadying effort of the
will upon the perceiving consciousness
is controlled and immediately upon it
follows perception understanding insight
take a tried example supposing someone
is walking in an Indian forest a
charging elephant suddenly appears the
man is excited by astonishment and
perhaps terror but he exercises an
effort of will perceives the situation
in its true bearings and recognizes that
a certain thing must be done in this
case probably that he must get out of
the way as quickly as possible
or a comet unheralded appears in the sky
like a flaming sword the bee holders at
first astonished perhaps terror stricken
but he takes himself in hand controls
his thoughts views the apparition calmly
and finally calculates its orbit and its
relation to meteor showers these are
extreme illustrations but with all
knowledge the order of perception is the
same first the excitation of the mind by
the new object impressed on it then the
control of the mind from within upon
which follows the perception of the
nature of the object where the eyes of
the spiritual man are open this will be
a true and penetrating spiritual
perception in some such way to our
living experience come to us first with
a shock of pain then the soul studies
itself and controls the pain then the
spirit perceives the lessons of the
event and its bearing upon the
progressive revelation of life Timm
through frequent repetition of this
process the mind becomes habituated to
it and there arises an equitable flow of
perceiving consciousness control of the
mind by the soul like control of the
muscles by the mind comes by practice
and constant voluntary repetition as an
example of control of the muscles by the
mind take the ceaseless practice by
which a musician
gains mastery over his instrument or a
fencer gain skill with a rapier
innumerable small efforts of attention
will make a result which seems well nigh
of miraculous which for the novice is
really miraculous then consider the far
more wonderful instrument the perceiving
mind played on by that fine musician the
soul here again innumerable small
efforts of attention will accumulate
into mastery and a mastery worth winning
for a concrete example take the gradual
conquest of each day and the effort to
live that day for the soul to him that
is faithful unto death the master gives
the crown of life 11 the gradual
conquest of the minds tendency to flit
from one object to another and the power
of one pointedness make the development
of contemplation as an illustration of
the minds tendency to flit from one
object to another take a small boy
learning arithmetic he begins to ones
are two three ones are three and then he
thinks of three coins in his pocket
which will purchase so much candy in the
store down the street next to the toy
shop where our baseball's marbles and so
on then he comes back with the jerk two
four ones are four so with us also we
are seeking the meaning of our task but
the mind takes advantage of a moment of
slackened attention and flits off from
one frivolous detail to another till we
suddenly come back to consciousness
after traversing leagues of space we
must learn to conquer this and to go
back within ourselves into the beam of
perceiving consciousness itself which is
a beam of the Oversoul this is the true
one pointedness the bringing of our
consciousness into a focus in the soul
12 when following this the controlled
manifold tendency and the aroused one
pointedness are equally balanced of the
perceiving consciousness is the
development of one pointedness
this would seem to mean that the insight
which is called one-pointedness has two
sides equally balanced there is first
the manifold aspect of any object the
sum of all its characteristics and
properties this must be held firmly in
the mind then there is the perception of
the object as a unity as a whole the
perception of its essence first the
details must be clearly perceived then
the essence must be comprehended for the
two processes are equally balanced the
true one pointedness is attained
everything has these two sides the sight
of difference and the sight of unity
there is the individual and there is the
genes-- the pull of matter and diversity
and the pull of oneness and spirit to
see the object truly we must see both
thirteen through this the inherent
character distinctive marks and
conditions of being and powers according
to their development are made clear by
the power defined in the preceding sutra
the inherent character distinctive marks
and conditions of beans and powers are
made clear for through this power as
defined we get a two-fold view of each
object seen at once all its individual
characteristics and its essential
character species and genis we see it in
relation to itself and in relation to
the eternal thus we see a roles as that
particular flower with its color and
scent its peculiar fold of each petal
but we also see it in the species the
family to which it belongs with its
relation to all plants to all life to
life itself so in any day we see the
events and circumstances we also see it
in the lesson set for the soul by the
eternal 14 every object has its
characteristics which are already
quiescent those which are active and
those which are yet not definable every
object has characteristics belonging to
its past its present and its future in a
fir tree for example there are stumps or
scars of dead branches
which once represented its foremost
growth there are the branches with their
needles spread out into the air there
are the buds at the end of each branch
and twig which carry the still closely
packed needles which are the promise of
the future in like manner the chrysalis
has as its past the caterpillar as its
future the butterfly the man has in his
past the animal in his future the angel
both are visible even now in his face
so with all things for all things change
and grow 15 difference in stage is the
cause of difference in development but
this amplifies what has just been said
the first stage is the sapling the
caterpillar the animal the second stage
is the growing tree the chrysalis the
man the third is the splendid pine the
butterfly the angel difference of stage
is the cause of difference of
development so it is among men and among
the races of men sixteen through
perfectly concentrated meditation on the
three stages of development comes a
knowledge of past and future we've taken
our illustrations from natural science
because since every true discovery in
Natural Science is a divination of law
and nature attained through a flash of
genius such discoveries really represent
acts of spiritual perception acts of
perception by the spiritual man even
though they are generally not so
recognised so we may once more use the
same illustration perfectly concentrated
meditation perfect insight into the
chrysalis reveals the caterpillar that
has been the butterfly that it is
destined to be he who knows the seed
knows the seed pod or ear it has come
from and the plant that is to come from
it so in like manner he who really knows
today and the heart of today knows his
parent yesterday and his child tomorrow
past present and future are all in the
eternal he who dwells in the eternal
knows all three
17 the sound and the object and the
thought called up by a word are
confounded because they are all blurred
together in the mind by perfectly
concentrated meditation on the
distinction between them there comes an
understanding of the sounds uh turd by
all beings it must be remembered that we
are speaking of perception by the
spiritual man sound like every force is
the expression of a power of the eternal
infinite shades of this power are
expressed in the infinitely varied tones
of sound he who having entry into the
consciousness of the eternal knows the
essence of this power can define the
meaning of all sounds from the voice of
the insect to the music of the spheres
in a like manner he who has attained to
spiritual vision can perceive the mind
images in the thoughts of others with
the shade of feeling which goes with
them thus reading their thoughts as
easily as he hears their words everyone
has the germ of this power since
difference of tone will give widely
differing meanings to the same words
meanings which are intuitively perceived
by everyone 18 when the mind impressions
become visible there comes an
understanding of previous births this is
simple enough if we grasp the truth of
rebirth the fine harvest of past
experiences is drawn into the spiritual
nature forming indeed the basis of its
development when the consciousness has
been raised to a point above these fine
subjective impressions and can look down
upon them from above this will in itself
be a remembering of past births 19 by
perfectly concentrated meditation on
mind images is gained the understanding
of the thoughts of others here for those
who can profit by it is the secret of
thought reading take the simplest case
of intentional thought transference it
is the testimony of those who have done
this that the perceiving mind must be
stilled before the mind image projected
by the
their mind can be seen with it comes a
sense of the feeling and temper of the
other mind and so on in higher degrees
20 but since that on which the thought
of the mind of another rests is not
objective to the thought readers
consciousness he perceives the thought
only and not also that on which the
thought rests the meaning appears to be
simple one may be able to perceive the
thoughts of someone at a distance
one cannot by that means alone also
perceive the external surroundings of
that person which aroused these thoughts
21 by perfectly concentrated meditation
on the form of the body by arresting the
body's perceptibility and by inhibiting
the eyes power of sight there comes the
power to make the body invisible there
are many instances of the exercise of
this power by mesmerist s-- hypnotists
and the like and we may simply call it
an instance of the power of suggestion
Shankara tells us that by this power the
popular magicians of the East perform
their wonders working on the mind images
of others while remaining invisible
themselves it is all a question of being
able to see and control the mind images
22 the works which will fill out the
lifespan may be either immediately or
gradually operative by perfectly
concentrated meditation on these comes a
knowledge of the time of the end as also
through signs a garment which is wet
says the commentator may be hung up to
dry and sold dry rapidly or it may be
rolled in a ball and dry slowly so a
fire may blaze or smolder thus it is
with karma the works that fill out the
lifespan by an insight into the mental
forms and forces which make up karma
there comes a knowledge of the rapidity
or slowness of their development and of
the time when the debt will be paid 23
by perfectly concentrated meditation on
sympathy compassion and kindness
has gained the power of interior union
with others unity is the reality
separateness the illusion the nearer we
come to reality the nearer we come to
unity of heart sympathy compassion
kindness are molds of this unity of
heart whereby we rejoice with those who
rejoice and weep with those who weep
these things are learned by desiring to
learn them 24 by perfectly concentrated
meditation on power even such power as
that of the elephant may be gained this
is a pretty image elephants possess not
only force but poise and fineness of
control they can lift a straw a child a
tree with perfectly judged control and
effort so the simile is a good one by
detachment by withdrawing into the
soul's reservoir of power we can gain
all these force and fineness and poise
the ability to handle with equal mastery
all things small and great concrete and
abstract like twenty five by bending
upon them the awakened inner light there
comes a knowledge of things subtle or
concealed or obscure as was said at the
outset each consciousness is related to
all consciousness and through it as a
potential consciousness of all things
whether subtle or concealed or obscure
an understanding of this great truth
will come with practice as one of the
wise has said we have no conception of
the power of meditation 26 by perfectly
concentrated meditation on the Sun comes
a knowledge of the worlds this has
several meanings first by a knowledge of
the constitution of the Sun astronomers
can understand the Kindred nature of the
stars and it is said there is a finer
astronomy where the spiritual man is the
astronomer but the Sun also means the
soul and through knowledge of the soul
comes a knowledge of the realms of life
27 by perfectly
concentrated meditation on the moon
comes a knowledge of the lunar mansions
here again are different meanings the
moon is first the companion planet which
each day passes backward through one
mansion of the stars by watching the
moon the boundaries of the mansion or
learned with their succession in the
great time dial of the sky but the moon
also symbolizes the analytic mind with
its divided realms and these two may be
understood through perfectly
concentrated meditation 28 by perfectly
concentrated meditation on the fixed
pole star comes a knowledge of the
motion of the Stars addressing duty
Stern daughter of the voice of God
Woodsworth finally said they'll cost
preserve the stars from wrong and the
most ancient heavens though they are
fresh and strong thus suggesting a
profound relation between the moral
powers and the powers that rule the
worlds so in this Sutra the fixed pole
star is the eternal spirit about which
all things move as well as the star
toward which points the axis of the
earth deep mysteries attend both and the
veil of mystery is only to be raised by
meditation by open night vision of the
awakened spiritual man end of book 3 1
through 28 recording by Kirk Ziegler
Ogden Utah voice-overs by Kirk calm book
3 of the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali this
is a librivox recording all librivox
recordings are in the public domain for
more information or to volunteer please
visit librivox.org recording by Kurt
Ziegler the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali
translated by Charles Johnson book 329
through 55:29 perfectly concentrated
meditation on the center of force in the
lower trunk brings an understanding of
the order
the bodily powers we are coming to a
vitally important part of the teaching
of yoga namely the spiritual man's
attainment of full self-consciousness
the awakening of the spiritual man as a
self-conscious individual behind and
above the natural man in this awakening
and in the process of gestation which
precedes it there is a close relation
with the powers of the natural man which
are in a certain sense the projection
outward and downward of the powers of
the spiritual man this is notably true
of that creative power of the spiritual
man which when embodied in the natural
man becomes the power of generation not
only is this power the cause of the
continuance of the bodily race of
mankind but further in the individual it
is the key to the dominance of personal
life rising as it were through the life
channels of the body it flushes the
personality with physical force and
maintains and colors the illusion that
the physical life is the dominant and
all-important expression of life in due
time when the spiritual man has begun to
take form the creative force will be
drawn off and become operative in
building the body of the spiritual man
just as it has been operative in the
building of physical bodies through
generation in the natural world
perfectly concentrated meditation on the
nature of this force means first that
rising of the consciousness into the
spiritual world already described which
gives the one Shore foothold for
meditation and then from that spiritual
point of Vantage not only an insight
into the creative force in a spiritual
and physical aspects but also a
gradually attain control of this
wonderful force which will mean its
direction to the body of the spiritual
man and its gradual withdrawal from the
body of the natural man until the over
pressure so general and such a fruitful
source of misery in our day is abated
and purity takes the place of passion
this over pressure which is the cause of
so many evils
and so much of human shame is an
abnormal not a natural condition it is
primarily due to the spiritual blindness
to blindness regarding the spiritual man
and ignorant even of his existence for
by this blind ignorance are closed the
channels through which were they open
the creative force could flow into the
body of the spiritual man they're
building up an immortal vesture there is
no cure for blindness with its
consequent over pressure and attendant
misery and shame but spiritual vision
spiritual aspiration sacrifice the new
birth from above there is no other way
to lighten the burden to lift the misery
and shame from human life therefore let
us follow after sacrifice and aspiration
let us seek the light in this way only
shall we gain that insight into the
order of bodily powers and that mastery
of them which this Sutra implies 30 by
perfectly concentrated meditation on the
center of force in the well of the
throat there comes the cessation of
hunger and thirst
we are continuing the study of the
bodily powers and centers of force in
the relation to the powers and forces of
the spiritual man we've already
considered the dominant power of
physical life the creative power which
secures the continuance of physical life
and further the manner in which through
aspiration and sacrifice it is gradually
raised and set to the work of up
building the body of the spiritual man
we now come to the dominant psychic
force the power which manifests itself
in speech and in virtue of which the
voice may carry so much of the personal
magnetism endowing the orator with the
tongue of fire magical in its power to
arouse and rule the emotions of his
hearers this emotional power this
distinctively cyclical force is the
cause of hunger and thirst the psychical
hunger and thirst for sensations which
is the source of our two-sided life of
emotionalism with its hopes and
phears its expectations and memories is
desires and hates the source of this
psychical power or perhaps we should say
its center of activity in the physical
body is said to be in the cavity of the
throat thus in the Thai tree upon Ishod
it is written there is this shining
ether in the inner being therein is the
spiritual man formed through thought
immortal golden inward in the palate the
organ that hangs down like a nipple this
is the womb of Indra and there where the
dividing of the hair turns extending
upward to the crown of the head Indra is
the name given to the creative power of
which we have spoken and which we are
told resides in the organ which hangs
down like a nipple inward in the palate
31 by perfectly concentrated meditation
on the center of force in the channel
called a tortoise formed
steadfastness we are concerned now with
the center of the nervous or psychical
force below the cavity of the throat in
the chest in which has felt the
sensation of fear the center the
disturbance of which sets the heart
beating miserably with dread or which
produces that sense of terror through
which the heart is said to stand still
when the truth concerning fear is
thoroughly mastered through spiritual
insight into the immortal fearless life
then this force is perfectly controlled
there is no more fear just as through
the control of the psychic power which
works through the nerve center in the
throat there comes a cessation of hunger
and thirst thereafter these forces or
their spiritual prototypes are turned to
the building of the spiritual man always
it must be remembered the victory is
first a spiritual one only later does it
bring control of the bodily powers 32
through perfectly concentrated
meditation on the light in the head
comes the vision of the Masters who have
attained the tradition is that there is
a certain center of force in the head
perhaps the penal gland which some of
our Western philosophy
furs have supposed to be the dwelling of
the soul a center which is as it were a
doorway between the natural and the
spiritual man it is the seat of that
better and wiser consciousness behind
the outward looking consciousness in the
forward part of the head and that better
and wiser consciousness in the back of
the mind which view spiritual things and
seeks to impress the spiritual view on
the outward looking consciousness in the
forward part of the head it is the
spiritual man seeking to guide the
natural man seeking to bring the natural
man to concern himself with the things
of his immortality this is suggested in
the words of the Upanishad already
quoted there where the dividing of the
hair turns extending upward to the crown
of the head all of which may sound very
fantastical until one comes to
understand it it is said that when this
power is fully awakened it brings a
vision of the great companions of
spiritual man those who have already
attained crossing over to the further
shore of the sea of death and rebirth
perhaps it is to this divine sight that
the master alluded who is reported to
have said I counsel you to buy of me i
salve that you may see it is of this
same vision of the great companions the
children of light that a seer wrote
though inland far we be our souls have
sight of that immortal sea which brought
us hither can in a moment travel thither
and see the children's sport upon the
shore and hear the mighty waters rolling
evermore 33 or through the divining
power of tuition he knows all things
this is really the supplement the
spiritual side of the Sutra just
translated step by step as the better
consciousness the spiritual view gains
force in the back of the mind so in the
same measure the spiritual man is
gaining the power to see learning to
open the spiritual eyes when the eyes
are fully opened the spiritual man
behold
the great companions standing about him
he has begun to know all things this
divining power of intuition is the power
which lives above and behind the so
called rational mind the rational mind
formulates a question and lays it before
the intuition which gives a real answer
often immediately distorted by the
rational mind yet always embodying a
kernel of truth by this process through
which the rational mind brings questions
to the intuition for a solution that the
truths of science are reached the
flashes of discovery and genius but this
higher power need not work in
subordination to the so called rational
mind it may act directly as full
illumination the vision and the Faculty
divine 34 by perfectly concentrated
meditation on the heart the interior
beam comes the knowledge of
consciousness the heart hair seems to
mean as it so often does in the
Upanishads the interior spiritual nature
the consciousness of the spiritual man
which is related to the heart and to the
wisdom of the heart by steadily seeking
after and finding the consciousness of
the spiritual man by coming to
consciousness as the spiritual man a
perfect knowledge of consciousness will
be attained for the consciousness of the
spiritual man has this divine quality
while being and remaining a truly
individual consciousness it at the same
time flows over as a word and blends
with the divine consciousness above and
about it the consciousness of the great
companions and by showing itself to be
one with the divine consciousness it
reveals the nature of all consciousness
the secret that all consciousness is one
and divine 35 the personal self seeks to
feast on life through a failure to
perceive the distinction between the
personal self and the spiritual man all
personal experience really exists for
the sake of another namely the spiritual
man why perfectly concentrated
meditation on experience for the sake of
the self comes a knowledge of the
spiritual man the divine ray of the
higher self which is eternal impersonal
and abstract descends into life and
forms a personality which through the
stress and storm of life is hammered
into a definite and concrete self
conscious individuality the problem is
to blend these two powers taking the
eternal and the spiritual being of the
first and blending with it transferring
into it the self conscious individuality
of the second and thus bringing to life
a third being the spiritual man who is
heir to the immortality of his father
the higher self and yet has the self
conscious concrete individuality of his
other parent the personal self this is
the true immaculate conception the new
birth from above conceived of the holy
spirit of this new birth that is said
that which is born of the Spirit is
spirit
ye must be born again rightly understood
therefore the whole life of the personal
man is for another not for himself he
exists only to render his very life and
all his experience for the building up
of the spiritual man only through
failure to see this does he seek
enjoyment for himself seek to secure the
feasts of life for himself not
understanding that he must live for the
other live sacrificially offering both
feasts and his very beam on the altar
giving himself as a contribution for the
building of the spiritual man when he
does understand this and lives for the
higher self setting his heart and
thought upon the higher self then his
sacrifice bears divine fruit the
spiritual man is built up consciousness
awakes in him and he comes fully into
being as a divine and immortal
individuality 36 thereupon are born the
divine power of intuition
and the hearing the touch the vision the
taste and the power of smell of the
spiritual man when in virtue of the
perpetual sacrifice of the personal man
daily and hourly giving his life for his
divine brother the spiritual man and
through the radiance ever pouring down
from the higher self eternal in the
heavens the spiritual man comes to birth
there awaken him those powers those
physical counterparts we know in the
personal man the spiritual man begins to
see to hear to touch to taste and
besides the senses of the spiritual man
there awakes in his mind that divine
counterpart of the mind of the physical
man the power of direct and immediate
knowledge the power of spiritual
intuition of divination this power as we
have seen owes its virtue to the unity
the continuity of consciousness whereby
whatever is known to any consciousness
is knowable by any other consciousness
thus the consciousness of the spiritual
man who lives above our narrow barriers
of separateness is in intimate touch
with the consciousness of the great
companions and can draw on that vast
reservoir for all real needs thus arises
within the spiritual man that certain
knowledge which is called intuition
divination illumination 37 these powers
stand in contour distinction to the
highest spiritual vision in
manifestation they are called magical
powers the divine man is destined to
supersede the spiritual man as the
spiritual man supersedes the natural man
then the disciple becomes a master the
open powers of the spiritual man
spiritual vision hearing and touch stand
therefore encounter distinction to the
higher divine power above them and must
in no wise be regarded as the end of the
way for
the path has no end but rises ever to
higher and higher glories the souls
growth and splendor have no limit so
that if the spiritual powers we have
been considering are regarded as in any
sense final they are a hindrance a
barrier to the far higher powers of the
divine man but viewed from below from
the standpoint of normal physical
experience
they are powers truly magical as the
powers natural to a four-dimensional
being will appear magical to a
three-dimensional being 38 through the
weakening of the causes of bondage and
by learning the method of sassing the
consciousness is transferred to the
other body in due time after the
spiritual man has formed and grown
stable through the forces and virtues
already enumerated and after the senses
of the spiritual man have awakened there
comes the transfer of the dominant
consciousness the sense of individuality
from the physical to the spiritual man
thereafter the physical man is felt to
be secondary a subordinate an instrument
through whom the spiritual man works and
the spiritual man is felt to be the real
individuality this is in a sense the
attainment to full salvation and
immortal life yet it is not the final
goal or resting place but only the
beginning of the greater way the means
for this transfer are described as the
weakening of the causes of bondage and
an understanding of the method of
passing from one consciousness to the
other the first may be also described as
detachment and comes from the conquest
of the delusion that the personal self
is that the real man when that delusion
abates and is held in check the finer
consciousness of the spiritual man
begins to shine in the background of the
mind the transfer of the sense of
individuality to this finer
consciousness and thus to the spiritual
man then becomes a matter of
recollection of attention
primarily a matter of taking in a deeper
interest in the life and doings of the
spiritual man then in the pleasures or
occupations of the personality therefore
it is said lay not up for yourselves
treasures upon earth where moth and rust
cloth corrupt and where thieves break
through and steal but lay up for
yourselves treasures in heaven and
neither moth nor rust cloth corrupt and
where thieves do not break through nor
steal for where your treasure is there
will your heart be also
39 through mastery of the upward life
comes freedom from the dangers of water
morass and thorny places and the power
of ascension is gained here is one of
the sentences so characteristic of this
author and indeed of the Eastern spirit
in which there is an obvious exterior
meaning and within this a clear interior
meaning not quite so obvious but far
more vital the surface meaning is that
by mastery of a certain power called
hair the upward life and akin to
levitation there comes the ability to
walk on water or to pass over thorny
places without wounding the feet but
there is a deeper meaning when we speak
of the disciples path as a path of
thorns we use a symbol and the same
symbol is used here the upward life
means something more than the power
often manifested in abnormal psychical
experiences of levitating the physical
body or nearby physical objects
it means the strong power of aspiration
of upward will which first builds then
awakes the spiritual man and finally
transfers the conscious individuality to
him for it is he who passes safely over
the waters of death and rebirth and is
not pierced by the thorns in the path
therefore it is said that he who would
tread the path of power must look for a
home in the air and afterwards in the
ether of the upward life this is written
in the katha
Schad a hundred and one are the hearts
channels of these one passes to the
crown going up this he comes to the
immortal this is the power of ascension
spoken of in the sutra 40 by mastery of
the binding life comes radiance the upon
assad's it is said that this binding
life unites the upward life to the
downward life and these life's have
their analogies in the vital breaths in
the body the thought in the text seems
to be that when the personality is
brought thoroughly under control of the
spiritual man through the life currents
which bind them together the personality
is endowed with the new force a strong
personal magnetism one might call it
such as is often an homage of genius but
the tax seems to mean more than this and
to have in view the vesture of the color
of the Sun attributed by the apana shots
to the spiritual man that vesture which
a disciple has thus described the Lord
shall change our vile body that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body
perhaps body of radiance would better
translate the Greek in both these
passages the teaching seems to be that
the body of the full-grown spiritual man
is radiant or luminous for those at
least who have anointed their eyes with
eyesalve so that they see 41 from
perfectly concentrated meditation on the
correlation of herring and the ether
comes the power of spiritual hearing
physical sound we are told is carried by
the air or by water iron or some medium
on the same plane of substance but then
is a finer hearing whose medium of
transmission would seem to be the ether
perhaps not that either which carries
light heat and magnetic waves but it may
be the far finer ether through which the
power of gravity works for a while light
or heat or magnetic waves traveling from
the Sun to the earth take eight minutes
for the
it is mathematically certain that the
pull of gravity does not take as much as
eight seconds or even an eighth of a
second the pull of gravity travels it
would seem as quick as thought so it may
well be that in thought transference or
telepathy the thoughts travel by the
same way carried by the same thought
Swift medium the transfer of a word by
telepathy is the simplest and earliest
form of the divine hearing of the
spiritual man as that power grows and as
through perfectly concentrated
meditation the spiritual man comes into
more complete mastery of it he grows
able to hear and clearly distinguish the
speech of the great companions whose
counsel and comfort him on his way they
may speak to him either in wordless
thoughts or in perfectly definite words
and sentences 42 by perfectly
concentrated meditation on the
correlation of the body with the ether
and by thinking of it as light as
thistledown will come the power to
traverse the aether it has been said
that he who would tread the path of
power must look for a home in the air
and afterwards in the ether this would
seem to mean besides the constant
injunction to detachment that he must be
prepared to inhabit at first a psychic
and then an ethic body the former being
the body of Dreams the latter the body
of the spiritual man when he wakes up on
the other side of dreamland the gradual
accustoming to the consciousness of this
new ethnic vesture its gradual
acclimatization so to speak in the Erich
body of the spiritual man is what our
text seems to contemplate 43 when that
condition of consciousness is reached
which is far-reaching and not confined
to the body which is outside the body
and not conditioned by it then the veil
which conceals the light is torn away
perhaps the best comment on this is
afforded by the words of Paul I knew a
man in Christ above fourteen years ago
whether in the body I cannot tell
or whether out of the body I cannot tell
God knoweth such a one caught up to the
third heaven and I knew such a man
whether in the body or out of the body I
cannot tell
God knoweth how that he was caught up
into paradise and heard unspeakable or
unspoken words which is not lawful for a
man to utter the condition is briefly
that they awaken spiritual man who sees
and hears beyond the veil forty-four
mastery of the elements comes from
perfectly concentrated meditation on
their five forms the gross the elemental
the subtle the inherent their positive
these five forms are analogous to those
recognized by modern physics solid
liquid gaseous radiant and ionic when
the piercing vision of the awakened
spiritual man is directed to the forms
of matter from within as it were from
behind the scenes then perfect mastery
over the regularly elements is attained
this is perhaps equivalent to the
injunction inquire of the earth the air
and the water of the secrets they hold
for you the development of your inner
senses will enable you to do this 45
there upon will come the manifestation
of the atomic and other powers which are
the endowment of the body together with
its unassailable force the body in
question is of course the ethic body of
the spiritual man he is said to possess
eight powers the atomic the power of
assimilating himself with nature of the
atom which will perhaps involve the
power to disintegrate material forms the
power of levitation the power of
limitless extension the power of
boundless reach so that as the
commentator says he can touch the moon
with the tip of his finger the power to
accomplish his will the power of
gravitation the correlative of
levitation the power of command the
power of creative will these are the
endow
of the spiritual man further the
spiritual body is unassailable fire
burns it not water wets it not the sword
please it not dry winds parch it not and
it is said the spiritual man can impart
something of this quality and temper to
his bodily vesture 46 shapeliness beauty
force the temper of the diamond these
are the endowments of that body the
spiritual man is shapely beautiful
strong firm as the diamond therefore it
is written these things saith the son of
God who hath his eyes like unto a flame
of fire and his feet are like fine brass
he that overcometh and keepeth my works
unto the end to him I give power over
the nation's and he shall rule them with
the rod of iron and I will give him the
morning star 47 mastery over the powers
of perception and action come through
perfectly concentrated meditation on
their fivefold forms namely their power
to grasp their distinctive nature the
element of self-consciousness in them
their inherence and their purposiveness
take for example sight this possesses
first the power to grasp apprehend
perceive second it has its distinctive
form of perception that is visual
perception third it always carries with
its operations self consciousness the
thought I perceive fourth sight has the
power of extension through the whole
field of vision even to the utmost star
fifth it is used for the purposes of the
seer so with the other senses perfectly
concentrated meditation on each sense of
viewing it from behind and within as is
possible for the spiritual man brings a
mastery of the scope and true character
of each sense and of the world on which
they report collectively 48 thence comes
the power
as thought independent of instruments
and the mastery over matter we are
further enumerate in the endowments of
the spiritual man among these is the
power to traverse space with the
swiftness of thought so that whatever
place the spiritual man thinks of - that
he goes in that place he already is
thought has now become his means of
locomotion he is therefore independent
of instruments and can bring this force
to bear directly wherever he wills 49
when the spiritual man is perfectly
disentangled from the psychic body he
attains to a mastery over all things and
to a knowledge of all the spiritual man
is in meshed in a web of the emotions
desire fear ambition passion and impeded
by the mental forms of separateness and
materialism when these meshes are
sundered these obstacles completely
overcome then the spiritual man stands
forth on his own wide world strong
mighty wise he uses divine powers with
the divine scope and energy working
together with divine companions - such a
one it is said thou art now a disciple
able to stand able to hear able to see
able to speak thou hast conquered desire
and attained to self-knowledge thou has
seen my soul in its bloom and recognized
it and heard the voice of the silence
fifty by absence of all self-indulgence
at this point when the seeds of bondage
to soul are destroyed pure spiritual
being is attained the seeking of
indulgence for the personal self whether
through passion or ambition souls the
seed of future sorrow for this self
indulgence of the personality is a
double sin against the real a sin
against the cleanliness of life and a
sin against the universal being which
permits no exclusive particular good
since in the real all spiritual
possessions are held in common this
twofold sin brings it's reaching
punishment
it's confining bondage to sorrow but
ceasing from self-indulgence brings
purity liberation spiritual life 51
there should be a complete overcoming of
allurement or pride in the invitations
of the different realms of life lest
attachment to things evil arise once
more the commentator tells us that
disciples seekers for union are of four
degrees first those who are entering the
path second those who are in the realm
of illumines third those who have won
the victory over matter and the senses
fourth those who stand firm in pure
spiritual life to the second especially
the caution in the texts is addressed
more modern teachers would express the
same truth by a warning against the
delusions and fascinations of the
psychic realm which open around the
disciple as he breaks through into the
unseen worlds these are the dangers of
the anteroom safety lies in passing on
swiftly into the inner chamber him that
overcometh will i make a pillar in the
temple of my god and he shall go no more
out 52 from perfectly concentrated
meditation on the divisions of time and
their succession comes that wisdom which
is born of discernment the open Ishod
say of the liberated that he has passed
beyond the triad of time he no longer
sees life as projected into the past
present and future
since these forms are of the mind but B
holds all things spread out in the quiet
light of the eternal this would seem to
be the same thought and to point to that
clear-eyed spiritual perception which is
above time that wisdom born of the
unveiling of times delusion then shall
the disciple live neither in the present
nor in the future
but in the eternal 53 hence comes
discernment between things which are of
like nature not distinguished by
difference of kind character or position
here as also in the preceding sutra we
are close to the doctrine that
distinctions of order time and space are
creations of the mind the threefold
prism through which the real object
appears to us distorted and refracted
when the prism is withdrawn the object
returns to its primal unity no longer
distinguishable by the mind yet clearly
knowable by that higher power of
spiritual discernment of illumination
which is above the mind 54 the wisdom
which is born of discernment is starlike
it discerns all things and all
conditions of things it discerns without
succession simultaneously that wisdom
that intuitive divining power is
starlike says the commentator because it
shines with its own light because it
rises on high and illumines all things
not is hid from it whether things past
things present or things to come for it
is beyond the threefold form of time so
that all things are spread before it
together in the single light of the
divine this power has been beautifully
described by Columba some there are
though very few to whom divine grace has
granted this that they can clearly and
most distinctly see at one and at the
same moment as though under one ray of
the Sun even the entire circuit of the
whole world with its surroundings of
ocean and sky the inmost part of their
mind being marvelously enlarged 55 when
the vesture and the spiritual man are
alike pure then the perfect spiritual
life is attained the vesture says the
commentator must first be washed pure of
all stains of passion and darkness and
the seeds of future sorrow must be
burned up utterly then both the vesture
and the wear of the
vesture being alike pure the spiritual
man enters into perfect spiritual life
end of book three recording by Kirk
Ziegler Ogden Utah voiceovers by Kirk
calm
chapter 9 of the Yoga Sutras of
Patanjali this is a librivox recording
all librivox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org read
for you by Chiquito Craster the Yoga
Sutras of Patanjali translated by
Charles Johnston chapter 9
introduction to book 4 the third book of
the sutras has fairly completed the
history of the birth and growth of the
spiritual man and the enumeration of his
powers at least so far as concerns of
that first epoch in his immortal life
which immediately succeeds and
supersedes the life of the natural man
in the fourth book we are to consider
what one might call the mechanism of
salvation the ideally simple working of
cosmic law which brings the spiritual
man to birth growth and fullness of
power and prepares him for the splendid
toilsome further stages of his great
journey home the sutras are here brief
to obscurity only a few words for
example are given to the great triune
mystery and illusion of time a phrase or
two indicates the sweep of some
universal law yet it has hoped that by
keeping our eyes fixed on the spiritual
man remembering that he is the hero of
the story and that all that is written
concerns him and his adventures we may
be able to find our way through this
thicket of tangled woods and keep in our
hands the clue to the mystery the last
part of the book needs little
introduction in a sense it is the most
important part of the whole treatise
since it unmasks the nature of the
personality that psychical mind which is
the wakeful enemy of all who seek to
tread the path even now we can hear it
whispering the doubt whether that can be
a good part which does sets
mind at defiance if this then be the
most vital and fundamental part of the
teaching should it not stand at the very
beginning it may seem so at first but
had it stood there we should have not
comprehended it for he who would know
the doctrine must lead the life doing
the will of his father which is in
heaven
end of chapter 9 read for you by
Chiquito crusto Birmingham Alabama
chapter 10 of the Yoga Sutras of
Patanjali this is a librivox recording
all librivox recordings are in the
public domain for more information or to
volunteer please visit librivox.org read
for you by Chiquito Craster the Yoga
Sutras of Patanjali translated by
Charles Johnston chapter 10 book for one
psychic and spiritual powers may be
inborn or they may be gained by the use
of drugs or by incantations or by fervor
or by meditation spiritual powers have
been enumerated and described in the
preceding sections they are the normal
powers of the spiritual man the
anti-type the divine addition of the
powers of the natural man through these
powers the spiritual man stands sees
hears speaks in the spiritual world as a
physical man stands sees hears speaks in
the natural world there is a counterfeit
presentment of the spiritual man in the
world of dreams
a shadow Lord Of Shadows who has his own
dreamy powers of vision of hearing of
movement he has left the natural without
reaching the spiritual he has set forth
from the shore but has not gained at the
further verge of the river he is borne
along by the stream with no foothold on
either Shore leaving the actual he has
fallen shot of the reel caught in the
limbo of vanities and delusions the
cause of this aberrant phantasm is
always the worship of a false vein
itself the lot of Dreams
within one's own breasts this is the
psychic man Lord of delusive
and Beville during the psychic powers
spiritual powers like intellectual or
artistic gifts may be inborn the fruit
vetas of seeds planted and reared with
toil in a former birth so also the
powers of the psychic man may be inborn
aid elusive harvest from seeds of
delusion psychical powers may be gained
by drugs as poverty shame debasement may
be gained by the self same drugs in
their action they are painful cutting
the man off from the consciousness of
the restraining power of his divine
nature so that his forces break folk
exuberant like the laughter of drunkards
and he sees and hears things delusive
while sinking he believes that he is
risen growing weaker he thinks himself
full of strength beholding illusions he
takes them to be true such other powers
gained by drugs they are wholly psychic
since the real powers this spiritual can
never be so gained incantations are
affirmations of half truths concerning
spirit and matters what is and what is
not which work upon the mind and slowly
build up a wraith of powers and add
illusive well-being these two are of the
psychic realm of dreams lastly there are
the true powers of the spiritual man
built up and realized in meditation
through reverent obedience to spiritual
law to the pure conditions of being in
the divine realm to the transfer of
powers from one venture to another comes
through the flow of the natural creative
forces here if we can perceive it is the
whole secret of spiritual birth growth
and life spiritual being like Oh
is but an expression of the self of the
inherent power and being of Atma
inherent in the self our consciousness
and will which have as their lordly
heritage the wide sweep of the universe
throughout eternity for the self is one
who with the eternal and the
consciousness of the self may make
itself manifest seen hearing tasting
feeling or whatever perceptive powers
they may be just as the wild sunlight
may divide into many colored race so may
the will of the self manifest itself in
the uttering of words or in handling or
in moving and whatever powers of action
there are throughout the seven worlds
where the self is their will its powers
be it is but a question of the vesture
through which these powers shall shine
forth and wherever the consciousness and
desire of the ever creative self are
fixed whether a vest shall be built up
where the heart is there will the
treasure be also since through ages the
desire of the self has been toward the
natural world wherein the self sought to
mirror himself that he might know
himself
raivo a vesture of natural elements came
unto being through which blossomed
thought the self powers of perceiving
and of will the power to see to hear to
speak to walk to handle and when the
self does come to self consciousness and
with it to a knowledge of his
imprisonment shall set his desire on the
divine and real world and raised his
consciousness led to the spiritual
west-german shall be built up for him
there with its expression of his
inherent powers normal migration tither
be difficult for the self since the
divine is no strange or foreign land for
him but the house of his home where he
dwells from everlasting three the
apparent immediate cause is not the true
cause of the creative nature powers but
like the husbandmen in his field it
takes obstacles away the husbandmen
tells his field
taking up the clods of Earth into fine
mould penetrable to air and rain he
sells his seed carefully covering it for
fear of birds and the wind he waters the
seed Laden earth turning the little
rills from the irrigation tank now this
way and that removing obstacles from the
channels until the even flow of water
vitalizes the whole field and so the
plants germinate and grow first the
blade then the ear then the full corn in
the year but it is not the husbandmen
who makes them grow it is first the
miraculous plasmic power in the grain of
seal which brings forth after its kind
then the alchemy of sunlight which in
presence of the green coloring matter of
the leaves gathers hydrogen from the
water and carbon from the gases and the
air and mingles them in the hydrocarbons
of plant growth and finally the holy
account vital powers of the plant itself
stored up through ages and flowing down
from the primal sources of life the
husbandmen but removes the obstacles he
plants and waters but God gives the
increase so over the finer husbandmen of
diviner fields
he tells and sews but the growth of the
spiritual man comes through the surge
and flow of divine creative forces and
powers here again God gives the increase
the divine self puts forth for the
manifestation of its powers and new and
finer vesture the body of the spiritual
men for vestiges of consciousness are
built up in conformity with the Boston
of the feeling of selfhood the self says
a great teacher in turn attaches itself
to three vestiges first to the physical
body then to the finer body and thirdly
to the causal body finally it stands
forth a radiant luminous joyous as the
self when the self attributes itself to
the physical body there arises the
states of bodily consciousness built up
about the physical self when the self
breaking through this first
begins to see and feel itself in the
finer body to find Salford there then
the states of consciousness of the finer
body come into being or to speak exactly
the finer body and it states of
consciousness arise and Grille together
but the self must not dwell permanently
there it must learn to find itself in
the causal body to build up the wide and
luminous fields of consciousness that
belonged to that nor must dwell forever
there for there remains the full state
the divine with its own splendor and
everlastingness it is all the question
of the states of consciousness all a
question of raising the sense of salford
until it dwells forever in the eternal v
in the different fields of manifestation
the consciousness though one is the
elective cause of many states of
consciousness here is a splendid
teaching of oneness that lies at the
heart of the eastern wisdom
consciousness is ultimately one
everywhere and forever the eternal the
father is the one self of all beings and
so in each individual who is but a facet
of that self consciousness is one
whether it breaks through as the dull
fire of physical life or the murky flame
of the cyclic and passional or the
radiance of the spiritual man or the
full glory of the divine it is ever the
light not but the light the one
consciousness is the effective cause of
all states of consciousness on every
plane since among states of
consciousness that which is born of
contemplation is free from the seed of
future sorrow where the consciousness
breaks both in the physical body and the
flow play of bodily life begins its
progression carries with it inevitable
limitations birth involves death
meetings have their partings hunger
alternates with satiety age follows on
the heels of youth so do the states of
consciousness run along the circle of
birth and death with a psychic the
alternate
between prize and penalty a Swifter hope
has its shadows of fear or it is no hope
exclusive love is tortured by jealousy
pleasure passes to the deadness into
pain pains Circe's brings pleasure back
again so here to the states of
consciousness who run their circle in
all psychic States there is egotism
which indeed is the very essence of the
psychic and where there is egotism there
is ever the seed of future sorrow desire
carries bondage in its womb but where
the spiritual consciousness begins free
from self and stain the ancient law of
retaliation ceases the penalty of sorrow
lapses and is no more imposed the soul
now passes no longer from sorrow -
sorrow but from glory to glory
it's grill and splendour have no limit
the good passes to better best 7 the
works of followers after union make
neither for bright pleasure nor for dark
pain the works of others makes for
pleasure or pain or a mingling of these
the man of desire winds from his works
the reward of pleasure or encouraged the
penalty of pain or as so often happens
in life his geerdon like the passionate
mood of the lover his part pleasure and
part pain works done with self-seeking
bear within them the seeds of future
sorrow
conversely according to the proverb
present pain is a future gain but for
him who has gone beyond desire whose
desire is set on the eternal neither
pain to be avoided no pleasure to be
gained inspires his work he fears no
hell and desires no heaven his one
desire is to know the will of the Father
and finish his work he comes directly in
line with a divine will and works
cleanly and immediately without longing
of fear his heart dwells in the eternal
all his desires are set on the eternal
eight
from the force inherent in works comes
the manifestation of those dynamic mind
images which are conformable to the
ripening out of each of these works we
are now to consider the general
mechanism of karma in order that we may
pass on to the consideration of him who
is free from karma karma indeed is the
concern of the personal man of his
bondage of freedom it is a succession of
the forces which built up the personal
man reproducing themselves in one
personality after another now let us
take an imaginary case to see how these
forces may work out let us think of a
man with murderous intent in his heart
striking with a dagger at his enemy he
makes a red wound in his victims breast
at the same instant he paints in his own
mind a picture of that wound a picture
dynamic with all the fierce willpower he
has put into his murderous blow in other
words he has made a deep wound in his
own psychic body and when he comes to be
born again that body will become his
outermost vesture upon which with its
wound still their bodily tissue will be
built up so the man will be born maimed
or with the predisposition to some
mortal injury he is unguarded at that
point and any trifling accidental blow
will pierce the broken joints of a
psychic armor
thus do the dynamic mind images manifest
themselves coming to the surface so that
works done in the past may ripen and
come to fruition 9 works separated by
different nature or place or time are
brought together by the correspondence
between memory and dynamic impression
just as in the ripening out of mind
images into bodily conditions the effect
is brought about by the ray of creative
force sent down by the self somewhat as
the light of the magic lantern and
projects the details of a picture on the
screen but revealing the hidden and
making secret things palpable and
visible so does this the
ray exercised a selected power or the
dynamic mind images bringing together
into one day of life the seeds gathered
from many days the memory constantly
exemplifies this power a passage of
poetry will call up in the mind right
passages of many poets read at different
times so a prayer may call up many
prayers in like manner the same
overruling selected power which is the
ray of the Higher Self gathers together
from different births and times and
places those mind images which are
conformable and may be grouped in the
frame of a single life or a single event
through this grouping visible bodily
conditions or outward circumstances are
brought about and by these the soul is
taught and trained just as a dynamic
mind images of desire ripen out in
bodily conditions and circumstances so
the far more dynamic powers of
aspiration wherein the soul reaches
toward the eternal have their fruition
in a finer world building the vesture of
the spiritual man 10 the series of
dynamic mind images is beginningless
because desire is everlasting the whole
series of dynamic mind images which make
up the entire history of the personal
man is a part of the mechanism which the
self employs to mirror itself in a
reflection to embody its powers in an
outward form to the end of self
expression self-realization
self-knowledge of fo the initial impulse
behind these dynamic mind images comes
from the self and is the descending ray
of the self so that it cannot be said
that there is any first member of the
series of images from which the rest
arose the impulse is beginningless since
it comes from the self which is from
everlasting desire is not to cease it is
to turn to the eternal and so become
aspiration 11 since the dynamic mind
images are held together by impulse
of desire by the wish a personal reward
by the substratum of mental habit by the
support of outer things a desired
therefore when they cease the self
reproduction of dynamic mind images
ceases we are still concerned with a
personal life in its bodily vestra and
with the process whereby the forces
which have upheld it are gradually
transferred to the life of the spiritual
man and build up for him his finer
vesture in a finer world how is the
current to be changed how is a flow of
self reproductive mind images which have
built the conditions of life after life
in this world abolished to be checked
that the time of imprisonment may come
to an end the day of liberation dawn the
answer is given in the Sutra just
translated the driving force is
withdrawn and directed to the up
building of the spiritual body when the
building impulses and forces are the
throng the tendency to manifest a new
psychical body a new body of bondage
ceases with them 12 the differences
between that which is past and that
which has not yet come according to
their natures depends on the difference
of phase of their properties here we
come to a high and difficult matter but
has always been held to be of great
moment in the Eastern wisdom the thought
that the division of time into past
present and future is in great measure
and illusion that past present future
all dwell together and the eternal now
the discernment of this truth has been
held to be so necessarily a part of
wisdom that one of the names of the
enlightened is he who has passed beyond
the three times past present future so
the Western master said before Abraham
was I am
and again I am with you always until the
end of the world
using the eternal present for past and
future alike with the same purpose the
master speaks of himself as the Alpha
and the Omega the beginning in the end
the first and the last and a master of
our own days writes I feel even
irritated at having to use these three
clumsy words past present and future
miserable concepts of the objective
phases of the subjective whole they are
about as ill adapted for the purpose as
an axe for fine carving in the eternal
now both past and future are consummated
be Oakland the Swedish philosopher has
well stated the same truth neither past
nor future can exist to God he lives
undivided Lee without limitations and
needs not as men to blot out his
existence in a series of moments the
Eternity vent is not identical with
unending time it has a different form of
existence related to time as the perfect
to the imperfect man as an entity for
himself must have the natural
limitations for the part conceived by
God man is eternal in the divine sense
but conceived by himself man's eternal
life is clothed in the limitations we
call time the eternal is a constant
present without beginning or end without
past a future thirteen the properties
whether manifest or latent are of the
nature of the three potencies the three
potencies are the three manifested
modifications of the one primal material
which stands opposite to perceiving
consciousness the three potencies are
called substance force darkness of you'd
rather for their moral coloring goodness
passion in edna's every material
manifestation is a projection of
substance into the empty space of
darkness every mental state is either
good or passional or inert so rather
subjective or objective Latin tour
manifest
all things that present themselves to
the perceiving consciousness are
compounded of these three this is a
fundamental doctrine of the Sankhya
system 14 the external manifestation of
an object takes place when the
transformations are in the same phase we
should be inclined to express the same
law by saying for example that a sound
is audible when it consists of
vibrations within the compass of the
auditory nerve that an object is visible
when either directly or by reflection it
sends forth luminiferous vibrations
within the compass of the retina and the
optic nerve vibrations below or above a
VAT compass make no impression at all
and the object remains invisible as for
example a kettle of boiling water in a
dark room though the kettle is sending
forth Heat vibrations closely akin to
light so when the vibrations of the
objects and those of the perceptive
power are in the same phase the external
manifestation of the object takes place
there seems to be a further suggestion
that the appearance of an object in the
present or its remaining hid in the past
or future is likewise a question of
faith and just as a range of vibrations
perceived might be increased by the
development of finer senses so the
perception of things past and things to
come may be easy from a higher point of
view 15 the paths of material things and
of states of consciousness are distinct
as is manifest from the fact that the
same object may produce different
impressions in different minds having
shown that our bodily condition and
circumstances depend on karana while
current depends on perception and will
the sage recognizes the fact that from
this may be drawn the fourth deduction
that material things are in nowise
different from states of mine the same
thought has occurred and still occurs to
all philosophers and by various
reasonings they all come to
same wise conclusion that the material
world is not made by the mood of any
human mind but is rather the
manifestation of the totally invisible
being whether we call this Mahad
with the ancients or ether with
immortals sixteen nor two material
objects depend upon a single mind for
how could they remain objected to others
if that mind is seized to think of them
this is but a further development of the
thought of the preceding Sutra carrying
on the thought of that while the
universe is spiritual yet its material
expression is ordered consistent ruled
by law not subject to the whims or
affirmations of a single mind unwelcome
material things may be escaped by
spiritual growth by rising to a realm
above them and not by denying their
existence on their own plane so that our
system is neither materialistic nor
idealistic in the extreme sense but
rather intuitional and spiritual holding
that matter is the manifestation of
spirit as a whole a reflection or
externalization of spirit and like
spirit everywhere obedient to law the
path of liberation is not a through
denial of matter but through denial of
wills of self through obedience and that
aspiration which builds the vesture of
the spiritual man 17 an object is
perceived or not perceived according as
the mind is or is not tinged over the
color of the object the simplest
manifestation of this is the matter of
attention our minds apprehend what they
wish to apprehend all else passes
unnoticed or on the other hand we
perceive what we resent as for example
the noise of a passing train while
others used to the sound do not notice
it at all but the deeper meaning is that
out of the vast totality of objects ever
present in the universe the mind
perceives only those which conform to
the hue of its karma the rest remain
unseen
even though close at hand this spiritual
law has been well expressed by Emerson
true solidest eternal things the man
finds his Road
as if they did not subsist and does not
once suspect they're being as soon as he
needs a new object suddenly he beholds
it and no longer attempts to pass
through it but takes another way when he
has exhausted for the time the
nourishment to be drawn from any one
person or thing that object is withdrawn
from his observation and those still in
his immediate neighbourhood he does not
suspect its presence
nothing is dead men feign themselves
dead and in mock funerals and mournful
obituaries and where they stand looking
out of the window and sound and well in
some new and strange disguise Jesus is
not dead he is very well alive nor John
no Paul nor Muhammad nor Aristotle at
times we believe that we have seen of
them all and could easily tell the names
under which they go 18 the movements of
the psychic nature are perpetually
objects of perception
since the spiritual man who is the lord
of them remains unchanging here is
teaching of the utmost import both for
understanding and for practice - the
psychic nature belong all the ebb and
flow of emotion all hoping and fearing
desire and hate the things that make the
multitude of men and women deemed
themselves happy or miserable - it also
belong the measuring and comparing the
doubt and questioning which for the same
multitude make up mental life so that
their results of the emotions so
personality with its a dark and narrow
view of life the shivering terror driven
personality that is life itself for all
but all of mankind
yet the personality is not the true man
nor the living soul at all but only a
spectacle which the true man observes
let us understand this therefore and
draw ourselves up inwardly to the height
of the spiritual man who standing in the
quiet light of the eternal looks down
serene upon this turmoil of the outer
life one first masters the personality
the mind by thus looking down on it from
above from within by steadily watching
its ebb and flow as objective outward
and therefore not the real self this
standing back is the first step
detachment the second to maintain the
vantage ground thus gained is a
recollection 19 the mind is not a self
luminous since it can be seen as an
object this is a further step toward
overthrowing the tyranny of the mind the
psychic nature of emotion and mental
measuring this psychic self the
personality claims to be absolute
asserting that life is for it and
through it it seeks to impose on the
whole being of man it's narrow
materialistic faithless view of life and
the universe it would clip the wings of
the soaring soul but the soul D trolls
the tyrant by perceiving and steadily
affirming that the psychic self is no
true self at all not self luminous but
only an object of observation watched by
the serene eyes of the spiritual man
twenty nor could the mind at the same
time know itself and things external to
it the truth is that the mind knows
neither external things nor itself it's
measuring and analyzing it's hoping and
fearing hating and desiring never give
it a true measure of life nor any sense
of real values ceaselessly active it
never really attains
knowledge or if we admit its knowledge
it ever falls short of wisdom which
comes only through intuition the vision
of the spiritual man life cannot be
known by the mind its secrets cannot be
learned through the mind the proof is
the ceaseless strife and contradiction
of opinion among those who trust in the
mind much less can the mind know itself
the more so because it is pervaded by
the illusion that it truly knows truly
is true knowledge of the mind comes
first with a spiritual man arising
stands detached regarding the mind from
above with quiet eyes and seeing it for
the tangled web of psychic forces that
it truly is but the truth is divined
long before it is clearly seen and then
begins the long battle of the mind
against the real the mind fighting
doggedly craftily for its supremacy 21
if the mind be thought of as seen by
another more inward mind then there
would be an endless series of perceiving
minds and a confusion of memories while
at the expedience by which said the mind
seeks to deny and thwart the soul when
it feels that it is beginning to be
circumvented and seen true is to assert
that this scene is the work of a part of
itself one part observing the other and
thus leaving no need nor place for the
spiritual man do this strategy the
argument is opposed by a philosopher
that this would be no true solution but
only a postponement of the solution for
we should have to find yet another part
of the mind to view the first observing
part and then another to observe this
and so on endlessly the true solution is
that the spiritual man looks down upon
the psychic nature and observes it when
he views the psychic pictures gallery
this is memory which would be a hopeless
inextricable confusion if we thought of
one part of the
mind with its memories viewing another
part with memories of its own the
solution of the mystery lies not in the
mind but beyond it in the luminous life
of the risen Lord the spiritual man 22
when the psychical nature takes on the
form of the spiritual intelligence by
reflecting it then the self becomes
conscious of its own spiritual
intelligence we are considering a stage
of spiritual life at which the psychical
nature has been cleansed and purified
formerly it reflected in its plastic
substance the images of the earthy
purified now it reflects the image of
the heavenly
giving the spiritual intelligence a
visible form the self beholding that
visible form in which its spiritual
intelligence has as it were taken
palpable shape there by reaches self
recognition self comprehension the self
sees itself in this mirror and thus
becomes not only conscious but self
conscious this is from one point of view
the purpose of the whole evolutionary
process 23 the psychic nature taking on
the color of the seer and of things seen
leads to the perception of all objects
in the unregenerate man
the psychic nature is saturated with
images of material things of things seem
or heard or tasted or felt and this web
of dynamic images from the ordinary
material and driving power of life the
sensation of sweet things tasted clamors
to be renewed and drives the man into
effort to obtain its renewal so he adds
image to image each dynamic and
importunate piling up sins intolerable
burden then comes regeneration and the
washing away of sin through the fiery
created power of the soul which burns
out the stains of the psychic vesture
purifying it as gold is refined
in the furnace the suffering of
regeneration Springs from this
indispensable purified vendor psychic
vesture begins to take on the colour of
the soul no longer stain but suffused
with golden light and the man red
generate gleams over the radiant of
eternity thus the spiritual man puts on
fair raiment for office cleansing it is
said though your sins be as scarlet they
shall be as white as snow though they be
as crimson they shall be as wool 24 the
psychic nature which has been printed
with mind images of innumerable material
things exists now for the spiritual man
building for him the mind once the
tyrant is now the slave recognized as
outward separate not self a well-trained
instrument of the spiritual men for it
is not ordained for the spiritual man
that finding his high realm he shall
enter all together there and pass out of
the vision of mankind it is true that he
dwells in heaven but he also drills on
earth he has angels and archangels the
hosts of the just made perfect for his
familiar friends but he has at the same
time found a new kingship with a prone
children of men who stumble and sin in
the dark finding sinlessness he finds
also that the world's sin and shame are
his not to share but to atone finding
kinship with angels he likewise finds
his part in the pile of angels the toil
for the redemption of the world for this
work he who now stands in the heavenly
realm needs his instrument on earth and
this instrument he finds ready to his
hand and fitted and perfected by the
very struggles he has raged against it
in the personality the mind of the
personal man this once tyrant is now his
servant and perfect ambassador bearing
witness the foe men of heavenly things
and even in this present world doing the
will
working the works of the father 25 for
him who discerns between the mind and
the spiritual man becomes perfect
fruition of the longing after the real
beam of the self how many times in the
long struggle have the souls aspirations
seemed but a hopeless impossible dream a
madman's council of perfection yet every
finest most impossible aspiration shall
be realized and ten times more than
realized once the long arduous fight
against the mind and the minds world
view is one and then it will be seen a
VAT on fate and despair verba trebles of
the mind to daunt the soul and put off
the day when the neck of the mind shall
be put under the foot of the soul have
you aspired well nigh hopeless after
immortality you shall be paid by
entering the immortality of God have you
aspired in misery and pain after
consoling healing love you shall be made
a dispenser of the divine love of God
himself to very Souls have you sought
ardently in your day of feebleness after
power you shall wield power immortal
infinite with God working the works of
God have you in lonely darkness longed
for companionship and consolation you
shall add angels and archangels for your
friends and all the immortal hosts of
the dawn these are the fruits of victory
refa overcome these are the prizes of
regeneration death or die to self that
you may rise again to God 26 thereafter
the whole personal beam bends toward
illumination toward eternal life this is
part of the secret of the soul that the
salvation means not merely that a soul
shall be cleansed and raised to heaven
by that the whole realm of the natural
powers shall be redeemed building up
even in this present world the kingly
figure of the spiritual man
the traditions of the ages are full of
his footsteps
majestic uncompromised fill the memories
of all the noble of peoples but the time
cometh when he shall be known no longer
demigod namitha nor shadow but the
ever-present Redeemer working amid men
for the life and cleansing of all souls
27 in the internals of the batik other
thoughts will arise through the
impressions of the dynamic mind images
the battle is long and arduous let there
be no mistake as to that go not fought
to this battle without counting the cost
ages have gone to the strengthening of
the soul ages of conflict must be spent
ere the foe holy Concord becomes the
servant the souls minister to mankind
and from these long past ages in ours
when the contest flags will come new
foes mind bone children springing up the
fight for mind reinforcements coming
from forgotten years forgotten lives for
once this conflict has begun it can be
ended only by sweeping victory an
unconditional unreserved surrender of
the vanquished 28 these are to be
overcome as it was taught that
hindrances should be overcome these new
enemies and fears are to be overcome by
ceaselessly renewing the fight by a
steadfast dogged persistence whether in
victory or defeat which shall put the
stubbornness of the rocks to shame for
the soul is older than all things and
invincible it is of the very nature of
the soul to be uncomfortable therefore
fight on undaunted knowing that the
spiritual will once awakened shall
through the effort of the contest come
to its full strength that ground gained
can be held permanently that great as is
the dead weight of the adversary it is
yet measurable while the warrior who
fights for you for whom you fight is in
might immeasurable
invincible everlasting 29 he who after
he has attained is wholly free from self
reaches the essence of all that can be
known gathered together like cloud this
is the true spiritual consciousness it
has been said that at the beginning of
the way we must kill out ambition the
great curse the giant weed which grows
us strongly in the heart of the devoted
disciple as in the man of desire the
remedy is sacrifice of self obedience
humility the purity of heart which gives
the vision of God aver after he who has
attained is wrapped about with the
essence of over can be known as with a
cloud he has that perfect illumination
which is the true spiritual
consciousness through obedience to the
will of God he comes into oneness of
being with God he is initiated into gods
of view of the universe seeing all life
as God sees it 30 Veyron comes Circe's
from sorrow and the burden of toil such
a one it is said is free from the bond
of karma from the burden of toil from
that debt to works which comes from
works done in self love and desire free
from self will he is free from sorrow -
for sorrow comes from the fight of
self-will against the divine bill
through the correcting stress of the
divine bill which seeks to counteract
the evil wrought by disobedience when
the conflict with the divine will ceases
when sorrow ceases and he who has grown
into obedience Weber enters into joy 31
when all whales are rent all stains
washed away his knowledge becomes
infinite little remains for him to know
the first veil is the delusion of hadvar
soul is in some permanent way separate
from the great soul the divine eternal
when that whale is rent thou shalt this
by oneness with everlasting life
the second whale is the delusion of
enduring separateness from by other
selves whereas in truth the soul that is
in them is one with the soul that is
envy the world's sin and shame are Ison
and shame it's joy also these veils rent
thou shalt enter into knowledge of
divine things and human things little
will remain unknown to thee 32 there
after comes the completion of the series
of transformations of the three nature
potencies since their purpose is
attained it is a part of the beauty and
wisdom of the great Indian teachings the
Vedanta and the yoke alike to hold that
all life exists for the purposes of soul
for the making of the spiritual man they
teach that all nature is an orderly
process of evolution leading up to this
designed for this end existing only for
this to bring forth and perfect the
spiritual man he is the crown of
evolution at his coming the goal of all
development is attained 33 the series of
transformations is divided into moments
when the series is completed time gives
place to duration there are two kinds of
eternity says the commentary the
Eternity of immortal life which belongs
to the spirit and the eternity of change
which inherits in nature in all that is
not spirit while we are content to live
in and for nature in the circle of
necessity celsa we doom ourselves to
perpetual change that which is born must
die and that which dies must be reborn
it has changed ever more a ceaseless
series of transformations but the
spiritual man enters a new order for him
there is no longer eternal change but
eternal being he has entered into the
joy of his Lord this spiritual birth
which makes him heir of the everlasting
sets a term to change it is the
culmination the crowning transformation
of the whole realm of change 34 pure
spiritual life is level the inverse
resolution of the potencies of nature
that have emptied themselves of their
value for the spiritual man or it is the
return of the power of pure
consciousness to its essential form here
we have a splendid generalization in
which our wise philosopher finally
reconciles the naturalist and the
idealist expressing the crown and end of
his teaching first in the terms of the
naturalist and then in the terms of the
idealist the birth and growth of a
spiritual man and his entry into his
immortal heritage may be regarded says a
philosopher either as the culmination of
the whole process of natural evolution
and involution where that which flowed
from out the boundless deep turns again
home or it may be looked at as the
vedantins
look at it as the restoration of pure
spiritual consciousness to its pristine
and essential form there is no
discrepancy or conflict between these
two views which are but two accounts of
the same thing therefore those who study
the Weisse philosopher be they
naturalist or idealist have no excuse to
linger over dialectic subtleties or
disputes these things are lifted from
that part lest they should be tempted to
delay over them and they are left facing
the path itself stretching upward and
onward from their feet to the
everlasting hills radiant with infinite
light end of chapter 10 read for you by
Chiquito Craster Birmingham Alabama end
of the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali
translated by Charles Johnston